The book of the generations of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.
The son of Abraham was Isaac; and the son of Isaac was Jacob; and the sons of Jacob were Judah and his brothers;
And the sons of Judah were Perez and Zerah by Tamar; and the son of Perez was Hezron; and the son of Hezron was Ram;
And the son of Ram was Amminadab; and the son of Amminadab was Nahshon; and the son of Nahshon was Salmon;
And the son of Salmon by Rahab was Boaz; and the son of Boaz by Ruth was Obed; and the son of Obed was Jesse;
And the son of Jesse was David the king; and the son of David was Solomon by her who had been the wife of Uriah;
And the son of Solomon was Rehoboam; and the son of Rehoboam was Abijah; and the son of Abijah was Asa;
And the son of Asa was Jehoshaphat; and the son of Jehoshaphat was Joram; and the son of Joram was Uzziah;
And the son of Uzziah was Jotham; and the son of Jotham was Ahaz; and the son of Ahaz was Hezekiah;
And the son of Hezekiah was Manasseh; and the son of Manasseh was Amon; and the son of Amon was Josiah;
And the sons of Josiah were Jechoniah and his brothers, at the time of the taking away to Babylon.
And after the taking away to Babylon, Jechoniah had a son Shealtiel; and Shealtiel had Zerubbabel;
And Zerubbabel had Abiud; and Abiud had Eliakim; and Eliakim had Azor;
And Azor had Zadok; and Zadok had Achim; and Achim had Eliud;
And Eliud had Eleazar; and Eleazar had Matthan; and Matthan had Jacob;
And the son of Jacob was Joseph the husband of Mary, who gave birth to Jesus, whose name is Christ.
So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; and from David to the taking away to Babylon, fourteen generations; and from the taking away to Babylon to the coming of Christ, fourteen generations.
Now the birth of Jesus Christ was in this way: when his mother Mary was going to be married to Joseph, before they came together the discovery was made that she was with child by the Holy Spirit.
And Joseph, her husband, being an upright man, and not desiring to make her a public example, had a mind to put her away privately.
But when he was giving thought to these things, an angel of the Lord came to him in a dream, saying, Joseph, son of David, have no fear of taking Mary as your wife; because that which is in her body is of the Holy Spirit.
And she will give birth to a son; and you will give him the name Jesus; for he will give his people salvation from their sins.
Now all this took place so that the word of the Lord by the prophet might come true,
See, the virgin will be with child, and will give birth to a son, and they will give him the name Immanuel, that is, God with us.
And Joseph did as the angel of the Lord had said to him, and took her as his wife;
And he had no connection with her till she had given birth to a son; and he gave him the name Jesus.
And he got together his twelve disciples and gave them the power of driving out unclean spirits, and of making well all sorts of disease and pain.
Now the names of the twelve are these: The first, Simon, who is named Peter, and Andrew, his brother; James, the son of Zebedee, and John, his brother;
Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew, the tax-farmer; James, the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus;
Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot, who was false to him.
These twelve Jesus sent out and gave them orders, saying, Do not go among the Gentiles, or into any town of Samaria,
But go to the wandering sheep of the house of Israel,
And, on your way, say, The kingdom of heaven is near.
Make well those who are ill, give life to the dead, make lepers clean, send evil spirits out of men; freely it has been given to you, freely give.
Take no gold or silver or copper in your pockets;
Take no bag for your journey and do not take two coats or shoes or a stick: for the workman has a right to his food.
And into whatever town or small place you go, make search there for someone who is respected, and make his house your resting-place till you go away.
And when you go in, say, May peace be on this house.
And if the house is good enough, let your peace come on it: but if not, let your peace come back to you.
And whoever will not take you in, or give ear to your words, when you go out from that house or that town, put off its dust from your feet.
Truly I say to you, It will be better for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of God's judging than for that town.
See, I send you out as sheep among wolves. Be then as wise as snakes, and as gentle as doves.
But be on the watch against men: for they will give you up to the Sanhedrins, and in their Synagogues they will give you blows;
And you will come before rulers and kings because of me, for a witness to them and to the Gentiles.
But when you are given up into their hands, do not be troubled about what to say or how to say it: for in that hour what you are to say will be given to you;
Because it is not you who say the words, but the Spirit of your Father in you.
And brother will give up brother to death, and the father his child: and children will go against their fathers and mothers, and put them to death.
And you will be hated by all men because of my name: but he who is strong to the end will have salvation.
But when they are cruel to you in one town, go in flight to another: for truly, I say to you, You will not have gone through the towns of Israel before the Son of man comes.
A disciple is not greater than his master, or a servant than his lord.
It is enough for the disciple that he may be as his master, and the servant as his lord. If they have given the name Beelzebub to the master of the house, how much more to those of his house!
Have, then, no fear of them: because nothing is covered which will not come to light, or secret which will not be made clear.
What I say to you in the dark, say in the light: and what comes to your ear secretly, say publicly from the house-tops.
And have no fear of those who put to death the body, but are not able to put to death the soul. But have fear of him who has power to give soul and body to destruction in hell.
Are not sparrows two a farthing? and not one of them comes to an end without your Father:
But the hairs of your head are all numbered.
Then have no fear; you are of more value than a flock of sparrows.
To everyone, then, who gives witness to me before men, I will give witness before my Father in heaven.
But if anyone says before men that he has no knowledge of me, I will say that I have no knowledge of him before my Father in heaven.
Do not have the thought that I have come to send peace on the earth; I came not to send peace but a sword.
For I have come to put a man against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law:
And a man will be hated by those of his house.
He who has more love for his father or mother than for me is not good enough for me; he who has more love for son or daughter than for me is not good enough for me.
And he who does not take his cross and come after me is not good enough for me.
He who has the desire to keep his life will have it taken from him, and he who gives up his life because of me will have it given back to him.
He who gives honour to you gives honour to me; and he who gives honour to me gives honour to him who sent me.
He who gives honour to a prophet, in the name of a prophet, will be given a prophet's reward; and he who gives honour to an upright man, in the name of an upright man, will be given an upright man's reward.
And whoever gives to one of these little ones a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, truly I say to you, he will not go without his reward.
And it came about that when Jesus had come to the end of giving these orders to his twelve disciples, he went away from there, teaching and preaching in their towns.
Now when John had news in prison of the works of the Christ, he sent his disciples
To say to him, Are you he who is to come, or are we waiting for another?
And Jesus, answering, said to them, Go and give news to John of the things which you are seeing and hearing:
The blind see; those who were not able to, are walking; lepers are made clean; those who were without hearing, now have their ears open; the dead come to life again, and the poor have the good news given to them.
And a blessing will be on him who has no doubts about me.
And when they were going away, Jesus, talking of John, said to all the people, What went you out into the waste land to see? a tall stem moving in the wind?
But what went you out to see? a man delicately clothed? Those who have fair robes are in kings' houses.
But why did you go out? to see a prophet? Yes, I say to you, and more than a prophet.
This is he of whom it has been said, See, I send my servant before your face, who will make ready your way before you.
Truly I say to you, Among the sons of women there has not been a greater than John the Baptist: but he who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
And from the days of John the Baptist till now, the kingdom of heaven is forcing its way in, and men of force take it.
For all the prophets and the law were in force till John.
And if you are able to see it, this is Elijah who was to come.
He who has ears, let him give ear.
But what comparison may I make of this generation? It is like children seated in the market-places, crying out to one another,
We made music for you and you did not take part in the dance; we gave cries of sorrow and you made no signs of grief.
For John came, taking no food or drink, and they say, He has an evil spirit.
The Son of man has come feasting, and they say, See, a lover of food and wine, a friend of tax-farmers and sinners! And wisdom is judged to be right by her works.
Then he went on to say hard things to the towns where most of his works of power were done, because they had not been turned from their sins.
Unhappy are you, Chorazin! Unhappy are you, Beth-saida! For if the works of power which were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have been turned from their sins in days gone by, clothing themselves in haircloth and putting dust on their heads.
But I say to you, It will be better for Tyre and Sidon in the day of judging, than for you.
And you, Capernaum, were you not to be lifted up to heaven? you will go down into hell: for if the works of power which were done in you had been done in Sodom, it would have been here to this day.
But I say to you that it will be better for the land of Sodom in the day of judging, than for you.
At that time Jesus made answer and said, I give praise to you, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have kept these things secret from the wise and the men of learning, and have made them clear to little children.
Yes, Father, for so it was pleasing in your eyes.
All things have been given to me by my Father; and no one has knowledge of the Son, but the Father; and no one has knowledge of the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will make it clear.
Come to me, all you who are troubled and weighted down with care, and I will give you rest.
Take my yoke on you and become like me, for I am gentle and without pride, and you will have rest for your souls;
For my yoke is good, and the weight I take up is not hard.
At that time Jesus went through the fields on the Sabbath day; and his disciples, being in need of food, were taking the heads of grain.
But the Pharisees, when they saw it, said to him, See, your disciples do that which it is not right to do on the Sabbath.
But he said to them, Have you no knowledge of what David did when he had need of food, and those who were with him?
How he went into the house of God and took for food the holy bread which it was not right for him or for those who were with him to take, but only for the priests?
Or is it not said in the law, how the Sabbath is broken by the priests in the Temple and they do no wrong?
But I say to you that a greater thing than the Temple is here.
But if these words had been in your minds, My desire is for mercy and not for offerings, you would not have been judging those who have done no wrong.
For the Son of man is lord of the Sabbath.
And he went from there into their Synagogue:
And there was a man with a dead hand. And they put a question to him, saying, Is it right to make a man well on the Sabbath day? so that they might have something against him.
And he said to them, Which of you, having a sheep, if it gets into a hole on the Sabbath day, will not put out a helping hand and get it back?
Of how much more value is a man than a sheep! For this reason it is right to do good on the Sabbath day.
Then said he to the man, Put out your hand. And he put it out, and it was made as well as the other.
But the Pharisees went out and made designs against him, how they might put him to death.
And Jesus, having knowledge of this, went away from there, and a great number went after him; and he made them all well,
Ordering them not to give people word of him:
So that what was said by Isaiah the prophet might come true,
See my servant, the man of my selection, my loved one in whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my Spirit on him, and he will make my decision clear to the Gentiles.
His coming will not be with fighting or loud cries; and his voice will not be lifted up in the streets.
The crushed stem will not be broken by him; and the feebly burning light will he not put out, till he has made righteousness overcome all.
And in his name will the Gentiles put their hope.
Then they took to him one with an evil spirit, who was blind and had no power of talking: and he made him well so that he had the power of talking and seeing.
And all the people were surprised and said, Is not this the Son of David?
But the Pharisees, hearing of it, said, This man only sends evil spirits out of men by Beelzebub, the ruler of evil spirits.
And having knowledge of their thoughts he said to them, Every kingdom having division in itself is made waste, and every town or house having division in itself will come to destruction.
And if Satan sends out Satan, he makes war against himself; how then will he keep his kingdom?
And if I by Beelzebub send evil spirits out of men, by whom do your sons send them out? So let them be your judges.
But if I by the Spirit of God send out evil spirits, then is the kingdom of God come on you.
Or how may one go into a strong man's house and take his goods, if he does not first put cords round the strong man? and then he may take his goods.
Whoever is not with me is against me; and he who does not take part with me in getting people together, is driving them away.
So I say to you, Every sin and every evil word against God will have forgiveness; but for evil words against the Spirit there will be no forgiveness.
And whoever says a word against the Son of man, will have forgiveness; but whoever says a word against the Holy Spirit, will not have forgiveness in this life or in that which is to come.
Make the tree good, and its fruit good; or make the tree bad, and its fruit bad; for by its fruit you will get knowledge of the tree.
You offspring of snakes, how are you, being evil, able to say good things? because out of the heart's store come the words of the mouth.
The good man out of his good store gives good things; and the evil man out of his evil store gives evil things.
And I say to you that in the day when they are judged, men will have to give an account of every foolish word they have said.
For by your words will your righteousness be seen, and by your words you will be judged.
Then some of the scribes and Pharisees, hearing this, said to him, Master, we are looking for a sign from you.
But he, answering, said to them, An evil and false generation is looking for a sign; and no sign will be given to it but the sign of the prophet Jonah:
For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the stomach of the great fish, so will the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
The men of Nineveh will come up in the day of judging and give their decision against this generation: because they were turned from their sins at the preaching of Jonah; and now a greater than Jonah is here.
The queen of the South will come up in the day of judging and give her decision against this generation: for she came from the ends of the earth to give ear to the wisdom of Solomon; and now a greater than Solomon is here.
But the unclean spirit, when he is gone out of a man, goes through dry places looking for rest, and getting it not.
Then he says, I will go back into my house from which I came out; and when he comes, he sees that there is no one in it, but that it has been made fair and clean.
Then he goes and takes with him seven other spirits worse than himself, and they go in and make it their living-place: and the last condition of that man is worse than the first. Even so will it be with this evil generation.
While he was still talking to the people, his mother and his brothers came, desiring to have talk with him.
And one said to him, See, your mother and your brothers are outside, desiring to have talk with you.
But he in answer said to him who gave the news, Who is my mother and who are my brothers?
And he put out his hand to his disciples and said, See, my mother and my brothers!
For whoever does the pleasure of my Father in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.
On that day Jesus went out of the house and was seated by the seaside.
And great numbers of people came together to him, so that he got into a boat; and the people took up their position by the sea.
And he gave them teaching in the form of a story, saying, A man went out to put seed in the earth;
And while he did so, some seeds were dropped by the wayside, and the birds came and took them for food:
And some of the seed went among the stones, where it had not much earth, and straight away it came up because the earth was not deep:
And when the sun was high, it was burned; and because it had no root it became dry and dead.
And some seeds went among thorns, and the thorns came up and they had no room for growth:
And some, falling on good earth, gave fruit, some a hundred, some sixty, some thirty times as much.
He who has ears, let him give ear.
And the disciples came and said to him, Why do you say things to them in the form of stories?
And he said to them in answer, To you is given the knowledge of the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given.
Because whoever has, to him will be given, and he will have more; but from him who has not, even what he has will be taken away.
For this reason I put things into the form of stories; because they see without seeing, and give ear without hearing, and the sense is not clear to them.
And for them the words of Isaiah have come true, Though you give ear, you will not get knowledge; and seeing, you will see, but the sense will not be clear to you:
For the heart of this people has become fat and their ears are slow in hearing and their eyes are shut; for fear that they might see with their eyes and give hearing with their ears and become wise in their hearts and be turned again to me, so that I might make them well.
But a blessing be on your eyes, because they see; and on your ears, because they are open.
For truly, I say to you that prophets and upright men had a desire to see the things which you see, and saw them not; and to have knowledge of the words which have come to your ears, and they had it not.
Give ear, then, to the story of the man who put the seed in the earth.
When the word of the kingdom comes to anyone, and the sense of it is not clear to him, then the Evil One comes, and quickly takes away that which was put in his heart. He is the seed dropped by the wayside.
And that which went on the stones, this is he who, hearing the word, straight away takes it with joy;
But having no root in himself, he goes on for a time; and when trouble comes or pain, because of the word, he quickly becomes full of doubts.
And that which was dropped among the thorns, this is he who has the word; and the cares of this life, and the deceits of wealth, put a stop to the growth of the word and it gives no fruit.
And the seed which was put in good earth, this is he who gives ear to the word, and gets the sense of it; who gives fruit, some a hundred, some sixty, some thirty times as much.
And he gave them another story, saying, The kingdom of heaven is like a man who put good seed in his field:
But while men were sleeping, one who had hate for him came and put evil seeds among the grain, and went away.
But when the green stem came up and gave fruit, the evil plants were seen at the same time.
And the servants of the master of the house came and said to him, Sir, did you not put good seed in your field? how then has it evil plants?
And he said, Someone has done this in hate. And the servants say to him, Is it your pleasure that we go and take them up?
But he says, No, for fear that by chance while you take up the evil plants, you may be rooting up the grain with them.
Let them come up together till the getting in of the grain; and then I will say to the workers, Take up first the evil plants, and put them together for burning: but put the grain into my store-house.
He put another story before them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is like a grain of mustard seed which a man took and put in his field:
Which is smaller than all seeds; but when it has come up it is greater than the plants, and becomes a tree, so that the birds of heaven come and make their resting-places in its branches.
Another story he gave to them: The kingdom of heaven is like leaven, which a woman took, and put in three measures of meal, till it was all leavened.
All these things Jesus said to the people in the form of stories; and without a story he said nothing to them:
That it might come true which was said by the prophet, Opening my mouth, I will give out stories; I will give knowledge of things kept secret from before all time.
Then he went away from the people, and went into the house; and his disciples came to him, saying, Make clear to us the story of the evil plants in the field.
And he made answer and said, He who puts the good seed in the earth is the Son of man;
And the field is the world; and the good seed is the sons of the kingdom; and the evil seeds are the sons of the Evil One;
And he who put them in the earth is Satan; and the getting in of the grain is the end of the world; and those who get it in are the angels.
As then the evil plants are got together and burned with fire, so will it be in the end of the world.
The Son of man will send out his angels, and they will take out of his kingdom everything which is a cause of error, and all those who do wrong,
And will put them into the fire; there will be weeping and cries of sorrow.
Then will the upright be shining as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. He who has ears, let him give ear.
The kingdom of heaven is like a secret store of wealth in a field, which a man came across and put back again; and in his joy he goes and gives all he has, to get that field.
Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a trader searching for beautiful jewels.
And having come across one jewel of great price, he went and gave all he had in exchange for it.
Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net, which was put into the sea and took in every sort of fish:
When it was full, they took it up on the sands; and seated there they put the good into vessels, but the bad they put away.
So will it be in the end of the world: the angels will come and take out the bad from the good,
And will put them into the fire: there will be weeping and cries of sorrow.
Are all these things now clear to you? They say to him, Yes.
And he said to them, For this reason every scribe who has become a disciple of the kingdom of heaven is like the owner of a house, who gives out from his store things new and old.
And when Jesus had come to the end of these stories he went away from there.
And coming into his country, he gave them teaching in their Synagogue, so that they were greatly surprised and said, Where did this man get this wisdom and these works of power?
Is not this the woodworker's son? is not his mother named Mary? and his brothers James and Joseph and Simon and Judas?
And his sisters, are they not all with us? from where, then, has he all these things?
And they were bitter against him. But Jesus said to them, A prophet is nowhere without honour but in his country and among his family.
And the works of power which he did there were small in number because they had no faith.
At that time news of Jesus came to Herod the king;
And he said to his servants, This is John the Baptist; he has come back from the dead, and so these powers are working in him.
For Herod had taken John and put him in prison because of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife.
Because John had said to him, It is not right for you to have her.
And he would have put him to death, but for his fear of the people, because in their eyes John was a prophet.
But when Herod's birthday came, the daughter of Herodias was dancing before them, and Herod was pleased with her.
So he gave her his word with an oath to let her have whatever she might make request for.
And she, at her mother's suggestion, said, Give me here on a plate the head of John the Baptist.
And the king was sad; but because of his oaths and because of his guests, he gave the order for it to be given to her;
And he sent and had John's head cut off in the prison.
And his head was put on a plate and given to the girl; and she took it to her mother.
And his disciples came, and took up his body and put it in the earth; and they went and gave Jesus news of what had taken place.
Now when it came to the ears of Jesus, he went away from there in a boat, to a waste place by himself: and the people hearing of it, went after him on foot from the towns.
And he came out and saw a great number of people and he had pity on them, and made well those of them who were ill.
And when evening had come, the disciples came to him, saying, This place is waste land, and the time is now past; send the people away so that they may go into the towns and get themselves food.
But Jesus said to them, There is no need for them to go away; give them food yourselves.
And they say to him, We have here but five cakes of bread and two fishes.
And he said, Give them to me.
And he gave orders for the people to be seated on the grass; and he took the five cakes of bread and the two fishes and, looking up to heaven, he said words of blessing, and made division of the food, and gave it to the disciples, and the disciples gave it to the people.
And they all took of the food and had enough: and they took up twelve baskets full of broken bits which were not used.
And those who had food were about five thousand men, in addition to women and children.
And straight away he made the disciples get into the boat and go before him to the other side, till he had sent the people away.
And after he had sent the people away, he went up into the mountain by himself for prayer: and when evening was come, he was there by himself.
But the boat was now in the middle of the sea, and was troubled by the waves: for the wind was against them.
And in the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea.
And when they saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, It is a spirit; and they gave cries of fear.
But straight away Jesus said to them, Take heart; it is I, have no fear.
And Peter, answering, said to him, Lord, if it is you, give me the order to come to you on the water.
And he said, Come. And Peter got out of the boat, and walking on the water, went to Jesus.
But when he saw the wind he was in fear and, starting to go down, he gave a cry, saying, Help, Lord.
And straight away Jesus put out his hand and took a grip of him, and said to him, O man of little faith, why were you in doubt?
And when they had got into the boat, the wind went down.
And those who were in the boat gave him worship, saying, Truly you are the Son of God.
And when they had gone across, they came to land at Gennesaret.
And when the men of that place had news of him, they sent into all the country round about, and took to him all who were ill,
With the request that they might only put their hands on the edge of his robe: and all those who did so were made well.
Then there came to Jesus from Jerusalem Pharisees and scribes, saying,
Why do your disciples go against the teaching of the fathers? for they take food with unwashed hands.
And in answer he said to them, Why do you, yourselves, go against the word of God on account of the teaching which has been handed down to you?
For God said, Give honour to your father and mother: and, He who says evil of father or mother will be put to death.
But you say, If a man says to his father or his mother, That by which you might have had profit from me is given to God;
There is no need for him to give honour to his father. And you have made the word of God without effect because of your teaching.
You false ones, well did Isaiah say of you,
These people give me honour with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
But their worship is to no purpose, while they give as their teaching the rules of men.
And he got the people together and said to them, Give ear, and let my words be clear to you:
Not that which goes into the mouth makes a man unclean, but that which comes out of the mouth.
Then the disciples came and said to him, Did you see that the Pharisees were troubled when these words came to their ears?
But he said in answer, Every plant which my Father in heaven has not put in the earth, will be taken up by the roots.
Let them be: they are blind guides. And if a blind man is guiding a blind man, the two will go falling into a hole together.
Then Peter said to him, Make the story clear to us.
And he said, Are you, like them, still without wisdom?
Do you not see that whatever goes into the mouth goes on into the stomach, and is sent out as waste?
But the things which come out of the mouth come from the heart; and they make a man unclean.
For out of the heart come evil thoughts, the taking of life, broken faith between the married, unclean desires of the flesh, taking of property, false witness, bitter words:
These are the things which make a man unclean; but to take food with unwashed hands does not make a man unclean.
And Jesus went away from there into the country of Tyre and Sidon.
And a woman of Canaan came out from those parts, crying and saying, Have pity on me, O Lord, Son of David; my daughter is greatly troubled with an unclean spirit.
But he gave her no answer. And his disciples came and said to him, Send her away, for she is crying after us.
But he made answer and said, I was sent only to the wandering sheep of the house of Israel.
But she came and gave him worship, saying, Help, Lord.
And he made answer and said, It is not right to take the children's bread and give it to the dogs.
But she said, Yes, Lord: but even the dogs take the bits from under their masters' table.
Then Jesus, answering, said to her, O woman, great is your faith: let your desire be done. And her daughter was made well from that hour.
And Jesus went from there and came to the sea of Galilee; and he went up into the mountain, and took his seat there.
And there came to him great numbers of people having with them those who were broken in body, or blind, or without voice, or wounded, or ill in any way, and a number of others; they put them down at his feet and he made them well:
So that the people were full of wonder when they saw that those who had no voice were talking, the feeble were made strong, those whose bodies were broken had the power of walking, and the blind were able to see: and they gave glory to the God of Israel.
And Jesus got his disciples together and said, I have pity for the people, because they have now been with me three days and have no food: and I will not send them away without food, or they will have no strength for the journey.
And the disciples say to him, How may we get enough bread in a waste place, to give food to such a number of people?
And Jesus says to them, How much bread have you? And they said, Seven cakes, and some small fishes.
Then he gave an order to the people to be seated on the earth,
And he took the seven cakes of bread and the fishes; and having given praise, he gave the broken bread to the disciples, and the disciples gave it to the people.
And they all took food, and had enough; and they took up of the broken bits, seven baskets full.
And there were four thousand men who took food, together with women and children.
And when he had sent the people away, he got into the boat, and came into the country of Magadan.
And the Pharisees and Sadducees came and, testing him, made a request to him to give them a sign from heaven.
But in answer he said to them, At nightfall you say, The weather will be good, for the sky is red.
And in the morning, The weather will be bad today, for the sky is red and angry. You are able to see the face of heaven, but not the signs of the times.
An evil and false generation is searching after a sign; and no sign will be given to it but the sign of Jonah. And he went away from them.
And when the disciples came to the other side they had not taken thought to get bread.
And Jesus said to them, Take care to have nothing to do with the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
And they were reasoning among themselves, saying, We took no bread.
And Jesus, seeing it, said, O you of little faith, why are you reasoning among yourselves, because you have no bread?
Do you still not see, or keep in mind the five cakes of bread of the five thousand, and the number of baskets you took up?
Or the seven cakes of bread of the four thousand, and the number of baskets you took up?
How is it that you do not see that I was not talking to you about bread, but about keeping away from the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees?
Then they saw that it was not the leaven of bread which he had in mind, but the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
Now when Jesus had come into the parts of Caesarea Philippi, he said, questioning his disciples, Who do men say that the Son of man is?
And they said, Some say, John the Baptist; some, Elijah; and others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets.
He says to them, But who do you say that I am?
And Simon Peter made answer and said, You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.
And Jesus made answer and said to him, A blessing on you, Simon Bar-jonah: because this knowledge has not come to you from flesh and blood, but from my Father in heaven.
And I say to you that you are Peter, and on this rock will my church be based, and the doors of hell will not overcome it.
I will give to you the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatever is fixed by you on earth will be fixed in heaven: and whatever you make free on earth will be made free in heaven.
Then he gave orders to the disciples to give no man word that he was the Christ.
From that time Jesus went on to make clear to his disciples how he would have to go up to Jerusalem, and undergo much at the hands of those in authority and the chief priests and scribes, and be put to death, and the third day come again from the dead.
And Peter, protesting, said to him, Be it far from you, Lord; it is impossible that this will come about.
But he, turning to Peter, said, Get out of my way, Satan: you are a danger to me because your mind is not on the things of God, but on the things of men.
Then Jesus said to his disciples, If any man would come after me, let him give up all, and take up his cross, and come after me.
Because whoever has a desire to keep his life safe will have it taken from him; but whoever gives up his life because of me, will have it given back to him.
For what profit has a man, if he gets all the world with the loss of his life? or what will a man give in exchange for his life?
For the Son of man will come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then he will give to every man the reward of his works.
Truly I say to you, There are some of those here who will not have a taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.
And after six days Jesus takes with him Peter, and James, and John, his brother, and makes them go up with him into a high mountain by themselves.
And he was changed in form before them; and his face was shining like the sun, and his clothing became white as light.
And Moses and Elijah came before their eyes, talking with him.
And Peter made answer and said to Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here: if you will let me, I will make here three tents, one for you, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.
While he was still talking, a bright cloud came over them: and a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my dearly loved Son, with whom I am well pleased; give ear to him.
And at these words the disciples went down on their faces in great fear.
And Jesus came and put his hand on them and said, Get up and have no fear.
And lifting up their eyes, they saw no one, but Jesus only.
And when they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus gave them orders, saying, Let no man have word of what you have seen, till the Son of man has come again from the dead.
And his disciples, questioning him, said, Why then do the scribes say that Elijah has to come first?
And in answer he said, Elijah truly has to come and put all things right:
But I say to you that Elijah has come, and they had no knowledge of him, but did to him whatever they were pleased to do; the same will the Son of man undergo at their hands.
Then the disciples saw that he was talking to them of John the Baptist.
And when they came to the people, a man went down on his knees to him, saying,
Lord have mercy on my son: for he is off his head, and is in great pain; and frequently he goes falling into the fire, and frequently into the water.
And I took him to your disciples, and they were not able to make him well.
And Jesus, answering, said, O false and foolish generation, how long will I be with you? how long will I put up with you? let him come here to me.
And Jesus gave orders to the unclean spirit, and it went out of him: and the boy was made well from that hour.
Then the disciples came to Jesus privately, and said, Why were we not able to send it out?
And he says to them, Because of your little faith: for truly I say to you, If you have faith as a grain of mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, Be moved from this place to that; and it will be moved; and nothing will be impossible to you.
[]
And while they were going about in Galilee, Jesus said to them, The Son of man will be given up into the hands of men;
And they will put him to death, and the third day he will come again from the dead. And they were very sad.
And when they had come to Capernaum, those who took the Temple tax came to Peter and said, Does not your master make payment of the Temple tax?
He says, Yes. And when he came into the house, Jesus said to him, What is your opinion, Simon? from whom do the kings of the earth get payment or tax? from their sons or from other people?
And when he said, From other people, Jesus said to him, Then are the sons free.
But, so that we may not be a cause of trouble to them, go to the sea, and let down a hook, and take the first fish which comes up; and in his mouth you will see a bit of money: take that, and give it to them for me and you.
In that hour the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Who is greatest in the kingdom of heaven?
And he took a little child, and put him in the middle of them,
And said, Truly, I say to you, If you do not have a change of heart and become like little children, you will not go into the kingdom of heaven.
Whoever, then, will make himself as low as this little child, the same is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
And whoever gives honour to one such little child in my name, gives honour to me:
But whoever is a cause of trouble to one of these little ones who have faith in me, it would be better for him to have a great stone fixed to his neck, and to come to his end in the deep sea.
A curse is on the earth because of trouble! for it is necessary for trouble to come; but unhappy is that man through whom the trouble comes.
And if your hand or your foot is a cause of trouble, let it be cut off and put it away from you: it is better for you to go into life with the loss of a hand or a foot than, having two hands or two feet, to go into the eternal fire.
And if your eye is a cause of trouble to you, take it out, and put it away from you: it is better for you to go into life with one eye than, having two eyes, to go into the hell of fire.
Let it not seem to you that one of these little ones is of no value; for I say to you that in heaven their angels see at all times the face of my Father in heaven.
[]
What would you say now? if a man has a hundred sheep, and one of them has gone wandering away, will he not let the ninety-nine be, and go to the mountains in search of the wandering one?
And if he comes across it, truly I say to you, he has more joy over it than over the ninety-nine which have not gone out of the way.
Even so it is not the pleasure of your Father in heaven for one of these little ones to come to destruction.
And if your brother does wrong to you, go, make clear to him his error between you and him in private: if he gives ear to you, you have got your brother back again.
But if he will not give ear to you, take with you one or two more, that by the lips of two or three witnesses every word may be made certain.
And if he will not give ear to them, let it come to the hearing of the church: and if he will not give ear to the church, let him be to you as a Gentile and a tax-farmer.
Truly I say to you, Whatever things are fixed by you on earth will be fixed in heaven: and whatever you make free on earth will be made free in heaven.
Again, I say to you, that if two of you are in agreement on earth about anything for which they will make a request, it will be done for them by my Father in heaven.
For where two or three are come together in my name, there am I among them.
Then Peter came and said to him, Lord, what number of times may my brother do wrong against me, and I give him forgiveness? till seven times?
Jesus says to him, I say not to you, Till seven times; but, Till seventy times seven.
For this reason the kingdom of heaven is like a king, who went over his accounts with his servants.
And at the start, one came to him who was in his debt for ten thousand talents.
And because he was not able to make payment, his lord gave orders for him, and his wife, and his sons and daughters, and all he had, to be given for money, and payment to be made.
So the servant went down on his face and gave him worship, saying, Lord, give me time to make payment and I will give you all.
And the lord of that servant, being moved with pity, let him go, and made him free of the debt.
But that servant went out, and meeting one of the other servants, who was in debt to him for one hundred pence, he took him by the throat, saying, Make payment of your debt.
So that servant went down on his face, requesting him and saying, Give me time and I will make payment to you.
And he would not: but went and put him into prison till he had made payment of the debt.
So when the other servants saw what was done they were very sad, and came and gave word to their lord of what had been done.
Then his lord sent for him and said, You evil servant; I made you free of all that debt, because of your request to me:
Was it not right for you to have mercy on the other servant, even as I had mercy on you?
And his lord was very angry, and put him in the hands of those who would give him punishment till he made payment of all the debt.
So will my Father in heaven do to you, if you do not everyone, from your hearts, give forgiveness to his brother.
And it came about that after saying these words, Jesus went away from Galilee, and came into the parts of Judaea on the other side of Jordan.
And a great number went after him; and he made them well there.
And certain Pharisees came to him, testing him, and saying, Is it right for a man to put away his wife for every cause?
And he said in answer, Have you not seen in the Writings, that he who made them at the first made them male and female, and said,
For this cause will a man go away from his father and mother, and be joined to his wife; and the two will become one flesh?
So that they are no longer two, but one flesh. Then let not that which has been joined by God be parted by man.
They say to him, Why then did Moses give orders that a husband might give her a statement in writing and be free from her?
He says to them, Moses, because of your hard hearts, let you put away your wives: but it has not been so from the first.
And I say to you, Whoever puts away his wife for any other cause than the loss of her virtue, and takes another, is a false husband: and he who takes her as his wife when she is put away, is no true husband to her.
The disciples say to him, If this is the position of a man in relation to his wife, it is better not to be married.
But he said to them, Not all men are able to take in this saying, but only those to whom it is given.
For there are men who, from birth, were without sex: and there are some who were made so by men: and there are others who have made themselves so for the kingdom of heaven. He who is able to take it, let him take it.
Then some people took little children to him, so that he might put his hands on them in blessing: and the disciples said sharp words to them.
But Jesus said, Let the little ones come to me, and do not keep them away: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.
And he put his hands on them, and went away.
And one came to him and said, Master, what good thing have I to do, so that I may have eternal life?
And he said to him, Why are you questioning me about what is good? One there is who is good: but if you have a desire to go into life, keep the rules of the law.
He says to him, Which? And Jesus said, Do not put anyone to death, Do not be untrue in married life, Do not take what is not yours, Do not give false witness,
Give honour to your father and your mother: and, Have love for your neighbour as for yourself.
The young man says to him, All these things have I done: what more is there?
Jesus said to him, If you have a desire to be complete, go, get money for your property, and give it to the poor, and you will have wealth in heaven: and come after me.
But hearing these words the young man went away sorrowing: for he had much property.
And Jesus said to his disciples, Truly I say to you, It is hard for a man with much money to go into the kingdom of heaven.
And again I say to you, It is simpler for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a man with much money to go into the kingdom of God.
And the disciples, hearing this, were greatly surprised, saying, Who then may have salvation?
And Jesus, looking at them, said, With men this is not possible; but with God all things are possible.
Then Peter said to him, See, we have given up everything and have come after you; what then will we have?
And Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you that in the time when all things are made new, and the Son of man is seated in his glory, you who have come after me will be seated on twelve seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
And everyone who has given up houses, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or child, or land, for my name, will be given a hundred times as much, and have eternal life.
But a great number who are first will be last, and some who are last will be first.
Now when the birth of Jesus took place in Beth-lehem of Judaea, in the days of Herod the king, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem,
Saying, Where is the King of the Jews whose birth has now taken place? We have seen his star in the east and have come to give him worship.
And when it came to the ears of Herod the king, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.
And he got together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, questioning them as to where the birth-place of the Christ would be.
And they said to him, In Beth-lehem of Judaea; for so it is said in the writings of the prophet,
You Beth-lehem, in the land of Judah, are not the least among the chiefs of Judah: out of you will come a ruler, who will be the keeper of my people Israel.
Then Herod sent for the wise men privately, and put questions to them about what time the star had been seen.
And he sent them to Beth-lehem and said, Go and make certain where the young child is; and when you have seen him, let me have news of it, so that I may come and give him worship.
And after hearing the king, they went on their way; and the star which they saw in the east went before them, till it came to rest over the place where the young child was.
And when they saw the star they were full of joy.
And they came into the house, and saw the young child with Mary, his mother; and falling down on their faces they gave him worship; and from their store they gave him offerings of gold, perfume, and spices.
And it was made clear to them by God in a dream that they were not to go back to Herod; so they went into their country by another way.
And when they had gone, an angel of the Lord came to Joseph in a dream, saying, Get up and take the young child and his mother, and go into Egypt, and do not go from there till I give you word; for Herod will be searching for the young child to put him to death.
So he took the young child and his mother by night, and went into Egypt;
And was there till the death of Herod; so that the word of the Lord through the prophet might come true, Out of Egypt have I sent for my son.
Then Herod, when he saw that he had been tricked by the wise men, was very angry; and he sent out, and put to death all the male children in Beth-lehem and in all the parts round about it, from two years old and under, acting on the knowledge which he had got with care from the wise men.
Then the word of Jeremiah the prophet came true,
In Ramah there was a sound of weeping and great sorrow, Rachel weeping for her children, and she would not be comforted for their loss.
But when Herod was dead, an angel of the Lord came in a dream to Joseph in Egypt,
Saying, Get up and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel: because they who were attempting to take the young child's life are dead.
And he got up, and took the young child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel.
But when it came to his ears that Archelaus was ruling over Judaea in the place of his father Herod, he was in fear of going there; and God having given him news of the danger in a dream, he went out of the way into the country parts of Galilee.
And he came and was living in a town named Nazareth: so that the word of the prophets might come true, He will be named a Nazarene.
For the kingdom of heaven is like the master of a house, who went out early in the morning to get workers into his vine-garden.
And when he had made an agreement with the workmen for a penny a day, he sent them into his vine-garden.
And he went out about the third hour, and saw others in the market-place doing nothing;
And he said to them, Go into the vine-garden with the others, and whatever is right I will give you. And they went to work.
Again he went out about the sixth and the ninth hour, and did the same.
And about the eleventh hour he went out and saw others doing nothing; and he says to them, Why are you here all the day doing nothing?
They say to him, Because no man has given us work. He says to them, Go in with the rest, into the vine-garden.
And when evening came, the lord of the vine-garden said to his manager, Let the workers come, and give them their payment, from the last to the first.
And when those men came who had gone to work at the eleventh hour, they were given every man a penny.
Then those who came first had the idea that they would get more; and they, like the rest, were given a penny.
And when they got it, they made a protest against the master of the house,
Saying, These last have done only one hour's work, and you have made them equal to us, who have undergone the hard work of the day and the burning heat.
But he in answer said to one of them, Friend, I do you no wrong: did you not make an agreement with me for a penny?
Take what is yours, and go away; it is my pleasure to give to this last, even as to you.
Have I not the right to do as seems good to me in my house? or is your eye evil, because I am good?
So the last will be first, and the first last.
And when Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples on one side, and said to them,
See, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man will be given into the hands of the chief priests and scribes; and they will give orders for him to be put to death,
And will give him up to the Gentiles to be made sport of and to be whipped and to be put to death on the cross: and the third day he will come back again from the dead.
Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to him with her sons, giving him worship and making a request of him.
And he said to her, What is your desire? She says to him, Let my two sons be seated, the one at your right hand, and the other at your left, in your kingdom.
But Jesus made answer and said, You have no idea what you are requesting. Are you able to take of the cup which I am about to take?
They say to him, We are able. He says to them, Truly, you will take of my cup: but to be seated at my right hand and at my left is not for me to give, but it is for those for whom my Father has made it ready.
And when it came to the ears of the ten, they were angry with the two brothers.
But Jesus said to them, You see that the rulers of the Gentiles are lords over them, and their great ones have authority over them.
Let it not be so among you: but if anyone has a desire to become great among you, let him be your servant;
And whoever has a desire to be first among you, let him take the lowest place:
Even as the Son of man did not come to have servants, but to be a servant, and to give his life for the salvation of men.
And when they were going out from Jericho, a great number went after him.
And two blind men seated by the wayside, when they had the news that Jesus was going by, gave a loud cry, saying, Lord, Son of David, have mercy on us.
And the people gave them orders to be quiet; but they went on crying even louder, Lord, Son of David, have mercy on us.
And Jesus, stopping, sent for them, and said, What would you have me do to you?
They say to him, Lord, that our eyes may be open.
And Jesus, being moved with pity, put his fingers on their eyes: and straight away they were able to see, and went after him.
And when they were near Jerusalem, and had come to Beth-phage, to the Mountain of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples,
Saying to them, Go into the little town in front of you, and straight away you will see an ass with a cord round her neck, and a young one with her; let them loose and come with them to me.
And if anyone says anything to you, you will say, The Lord has need of them; and straight away he will send them.
Now this took place so that these words of the prophet might come true,
Say to the daughter of Zion, See, your King comes to you, gentle and seated on an ass, and on a young ass.
And the disciples went and did as Jesus had given them orders,
And got the ass and the young one, and put their clothing on them, and he took his seat on it.
And all the people put their clothing down in the way; and others got branches from the trees, and put them down in the way.
And those who went before him, and those who came after, gave loud cries, saying, Glory to the Son of David: A blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord: Glory in the highest.
And when he came into Jerusalem, all the town was moved, saying, Who is this?
And the people said, This is the prophet Jesus, from Nazareth of Galilee.
And Jesus went into the Temple and sent out all who were trading there, overturning the tables of the money-changers and the seats of those trading in doves.
And he said to them, It is in the Writings, My house is to be named a house of prayer, but you are making it a hole of thieves.
And the blind and the broken in body came to him in the Temple, and he made them well.
But when the chief priests and the scribes saw the works of power which he did, and the children crying out in the Temple, Glory to the son of David, they were angry and said to him,
Have you any idea what these are saying? And Jesus said to them, Yes: have you not seen in the Writings, From the lips of children and babies at the breast you have made your praise complete?
And he went away from them, and went out of the town to Bethany, and was there for the night.
Now in the morning when he was coming back to the town, he had a desire for food.
And seeing a fig-tree by the wayside, he came to it, and saw nothing on it but leaves only; and he said to it, Let there be no fruit from you from this time forward for ever. And straight away the fig-tree became dry and dead.
And when the disciples saw it they were surprised, saying, How did the fig-tree become dry in so short a time?
And Jesus in answer said to them, Truly I say to you, If you have faith, without doubting, not only may you do what has been done to the fig-tree, but even if you say to this mountain, Be taken up and put into the sea, it will be done.
And all things, whatever you make request for in prayer, having faith, you will get.
And when he had come into the Temple, the chief priests and those in authority over the people came to him while he was teaching, and said, By what authority do you do these things? and who gave you this authority?
And Jesus said to them in answer, I will put one question to you, and if you give me the answer, I will say by what authority I do these things.
The baptism of John, where did it come from? from heaven or from men? And they were reasoning among themselves, saying, If we say, From heaven; he will say to us, Why then did you not have faith in him?
But if we say, From men; we are in fear of the people, because all take John to be a prophet.
And they made answer and said, We have no idea. Then he said to them, And I will not say to you by what authority I do these things.
But how does it seem to you? A man had two sons; and he came to the first, and said, Son, go and do work today in the vine-garden.
And he said in answer, I will not: but later, changing his decision, he went.
And he came to the second and said the same. And he made answer and said, I go, sir: and went not.
Which of the two did his father's pleasure? They say, The first. Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you, that tax-farmers and loose women are going into the kingdom of God before you.
For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and you had no faith in him, but the tax-farmers and the loose women had faith in him: and you, when you saw it, did not even have regret for your sins, so as to have faith in him.
Give ear to another story. A master of a house made a vine garden, and put a wall round it, and made a place for crushing out the wine, and made a tower, and let it out to field-workers, and went into another country.
And when the time for the fruit came near, he sent his servants to the workmen, to get the fruit.
And the workmen made an attack on his servants, giving blows to one, putting another to death, and stoning another.
Again, he sent other servants more in number than the first: and they did the same to them.
But after that he sent his son to them, saying, They will have respect for my son.
But when the workmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is he who will one day be the owner of the property; come, let us put him to death and take his heritage.
And they took him and, driving him out of the vine-garden, put him to death.
When, then, the lord of the vine-garden comes, what will he do to those workmen?
They say to him, He will put those cruel men to a cruel death, and will let out the vine-garden to other workmen, who will give him the fruit when it is ready.
Jesus says to them, Did you never see in the Writings, The stone which the builders put on one side, the same has been made the chief stone of the building: this was the Lord's doing, and it is a wonder in our eyes?
For this reason I say to you, The kingdom of God will be taken away from you, and will be given to a nation producing the fruits of it.
Any man falling on this stone will be broken, but he on whom it comes down will be crushed to dust.
And when his stories came to the ears of the chief priests and the Pharisees, they saw that he was talking of them.
And though they had a desire to take him, they were in fear of the people, because in their eyes he was a prophet.
And Jesus, talking to them again in stories, said:
The kingdom of heaven is like a certain king, who made a feast when his son was married,
And sent out his servants to get in the guests to the feast: and they would not come.
Again he sent out other servants, with orders to say to the guests, See, I have made ready my feast: my oxen and my fat beasts have been put to death, and all things are ready: come to the feast.
But they gave no attention, and went about their business, one to his farm, another to his trade:
And the rest put violent hands on his servants, and did evil to them, and put them to death.
But the king was angry; and he sent his armies, and those who had put his servants to death he gave to destruction, burning down their town with fire.
Then he said to his servants, The feast is ready but the guests were not good enough.
Go then to the cross-roads, and get all those whom you see to come to the bride-feast.
And those servants went out into the streets, and got together all those whom they came across, bad and good: and the feast was full of guests.
But when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man who had not on a guest's robe;
And he says to him, Friend, how came you in here not having a guest's robe? And he had nothing to say.
Then the king said to the servants, Put cords round his hands and feet and put him out into the dark; there will be weeping and cries of sorrow.
For out of all to whom the good news has come, only a small number will get salvation.
Then the Pharisees went and had a meeting to see how they might make use of his words to take him.
And they sent to him their disciples, with the Herodians, saying, Master, we see that you are true, and that you are teaching the true way of God, and have no fear of anyone, because you have no respect for a man's position.
Give us, then, your opinion of this: Is it right to give tax to Caesar, or not?
But Jesus saw their trick and said, Oh false ones, why are you attempting to put me in the wrong?
Let me see the tax money. And they gave him a penny.
And he said to them, Whose is this image and name on it?
They say to him, Caesar's. Then he said to them, Give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the things which are God's.
And hearing it, they were full of wonder, and went away from him.
On the same day there came to him the Sadducees, who say that there is no coming back from the dead: and they put a question to him, saying,
Master, Moses said, If a man, at the time of his death, has no children, let his brother take his wife, and get a family for his brother;
Now there were among us seven brothers; and the first was married and at his death, having no seed, gave his wife to his brother;
In the same way the second and the third, up to the seventh.
And last of all the woman came to her end.
When they come back from the dead, then, whose wife will she be of the seven? because they all had her.
But Jesus said to them in answer, You are in error, not having knowledge of the Writings, or of the power of God.
For when they come back from the dead there are no husbands and wives, but they are as the angels in heaven.
But about the dead coming back to life, have you no knowledge of what was said to you by God in the Writings:
I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead but of the living.
And the people hearing it were surprised at his teaching.
But the Pharisees, hearing how the mouths of the Sadducees had been stopped, came together;
And one of them, a teacher of the law, put a question to him, testing him, and saying,
Master, which is the chief rule in the law?
And he said to him, Have love for the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind.
This is the first and greatest rule.
And a second like it is this, Have love for your neighbour as for yourself.
On these two rules all the law and the prophets are based.
Now while the Pharisees were together, Jesus put a question to them, saying,
What is your opinion of the Christ? whose son is he? They say to him, The Son of David.
He says to them, How then does David in the Spirit give him the name of Lord, saying,
The Lord said to my Lord, Be seated at my right hand, till I put under your feet all those who are against you?
If David then gives him the name of Lord, how is he his son?
And no one was able to give him an answer, and so great was their fear of him, that from that day no one put any more questions to him.
Then Jesus said to the people and to his disciples:
The scribes and the Pharisees have the authority of Moses;
All things, then, which they give you orders to do, these do and keep: but do not take their works as your example, for they say and do not.
They make hard laws and put great weights on men's backs; but they themselves will not put a finger to them.
But all their works they do so as to be seen by men: for they make wide their phylacteries, and the edges of their robes,
And the things desired by them are the first places at feasts, and the chief seats in the Synagogues,
And words of respect in the market-places, and to be named by men, Teacher.
But you may not be named Teacher: for one is your teacher, and you are all brothers.
And give no man the name of father on earth: because one is your Father, who is in heaven.
And you may not be named guides: because one is your Guide, even Christ.
But let the greatest among you be your servant.
And whoever makes himself high will be made low, and whoever makes himself low will be made high.
But a curse is on you, scribes and Pharisees, false ones! because you are shutting the kingdom of heaven against men: for you do not go in yourselves, and those who are going in, you keep back.
[]
A curse is on you, scribes and Pharisees, false ones! for you go about land and sea to get one disciple and, having him, you make him twice as much a son of hell as yourselves.
A curse is on you, blind guides, who say, Whoever takes an oath by the Temple, it is nothing; but whoever takes an oath by the gold of the Temple, he is responsible.
You foolish ones and blind: which is greater, the gold, or the Temple which makes the gold holy?
And, Whoever takes an oath by the altar, it is nothing; but whoever takes an oath by the offering which is on it, he is responsible.
You blind ones: which is greater, the offering, or the altar which makes the offering holy?
He, then, who takes an oath by the altar, takes it by the altar and by all things on it.
And he who takes an oath by the Temple, takes it by the Temple and by him whose house it is.
And he who takes an oath by heaven, takes it by the seat of God, and by him who is seated on it.
A curse is on you, scribes and Pharisees, false ones! for you make men give a tenth of all sorts of sweet-smelling plants, but you give no thought to the more important things of the law, righteousness, and mercy, and faith; but it is right for you to do these, and not to let the others be undone.
You blind guides, who take out a fly from your drink, but make no trouble over a camel.
A curse is on you, scribes and Pharisees, false ones! for you make clean the outside of the cup and of the plate, but inside they are full of violent behaviour and uncontrolled desire.
You blind Pharisee, first make clean the inside of the cup and of the plate, so that the outside may become equally clean.
A curse is on you, scribes and Pharisees, false ones! for you are like the resting-places of the dead, which are made white, and seem beautiful on the outside, but inside are full of dead men's bones and of all unclean things.
Even so you seem to men to be full of righteousness, but inside you are all false and full of wrongdoing.
A curse is on you, scribes and Pharisees, false ones! because you put up buildings for housing the dead bodies of the prophets, and make fair the last resting-places of good men, and say,
If we had been living in the days of our fathers, we would not have taken part with them in the blood of the prophets.
So that you are witnesses against yourselves that you are the sons of those who put the prophets to death.
Make full, then, the measure of your fathers.
You snakes, offspring of snakes, how will you be kept from the punishment of hell?
For this reason, I send you prophets, and wise men, and scribes: some of them you will put to death and put on the cross, and to some of them you will give blows in your Synagogues, driving them from town to town;
So that on you may come all the blood of the upright on the earth, from the blood of upright Abel to the blood of Zachariah, son of Barachiah, whom you put to death between the Temple and the altar.
Truly I say to you, All these things will come on this generation.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, putting to death the prophets, and stoning those who are sent to her! Again and again would I have taken your children to myself as a bird takes her young ones under her wings, and you would not!
See, your house is made waste.
For I say to you, You will not see me from this time till you say, A blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord.
And Jesus went out of the Temple, and on the way his disciples came to him, pointing out the buildings of the Temple.
But he, answering, said to them, See you not all these things? truly I say to you that here there will not be one stone resting on another, which will not be pulled down.
And while he was seated on the Mountain of Olives, the disciples came to him privately, saying, Make clear to us, when will these things be? and what will be the sign of your coming and of the end of the world?
And Jesus said to them in answer, Take care that you are not tricked.
For people will come in my name, saying, I am the Christ; and a number will be turned from the true way through them.
And news will come to you of wars and talk of wars: do not be troubled, for these things have to be; but it is still not the end.
For nation will be moved against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and men will be without food, and the earth will be shaking in different places;
But all these things are the first of the troubles.
Then they will be cruel to you, and will put you to death: and you will be hated by all nations because of my name.
And numbers of people will be turned from the right way, and will give one another up and have hate for one another.
And a number of false prophets will come, causing error.
And because wrongdoing will be increased, the love of most people will become cold.
But he who goes through to the end will get salvation.
And this good news of the kingdom will be given through all the world for a witness to all nations; and then the end will come.
When, then, you see in the holy place the unclean thing which makes destruction, of which word was given by Daniel the prophet (let this be clear to the reader),
Then let those who are in Judaea go in flight to the mountains:
Let not him who is on the house-top go down to take anything out of his house:
And let not him who is in the field go back to get his coat.
But it will be hard for women who are with child and for those with babies at the breast in those days.
And say a prayer that your flight may not be in the winter, or on a Sabbath.
Because in those days there will be great sorrow, such as there has not been from the start of the world till now, or ever will be.
And if those days had not been made short there would have been no salvation for any, but because of the saints those days will be made short.
Then if any man says to you, See, here is the Christ, or, Here; do not put faith in him;
For there will come up false Christs, and false prophets, who will do great signs and wonders; so that if possible even the saints might be tricked.
See, I have made it clear to you before it comes about.
If, then, they say to you, See, he is in the waste land; go not out: See, he is in the inner rooms; put no faith in it.
Because as in a thunderstorm the bright light coming from the east is seen even in the west; so will be the coming of the Son of man.
Wherever the dead body is, there will the eagles come together.
But straight away, after the trouble of those days, the sun will be made dark and the moon will not give her light and the stars will come down from heaven and the powers of heaven will be moved:
And then the sign of the Son of man will be seen in heaven: and then all the nations of the earth will have sorrow, and they will see the Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
And he will send out his angels with a great sound of a horn, and they will get his saints together from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.
Now take an example from the fig-tree: when her branch has become soft and puts out its leaves, you are certain that the summer is near;
Even so, when you see all these things, you may be certain that he is near, even at the doors.
Truly I say to you, This generation will not come to an end till all these things are complete.
Heaven and earth will come to an end, but my words will not come to an end.
But of that day and hour no one has knowledge, not even the angels in heaven, or the Son, but the Father only.
And as were the days of Noah, so will be the coming of the Son of man.
Because as in those days before the overflowing of the waters, they were feasting and taking wives and getting married, till the day when Noah went into the ark,
And they had no care till the waters came and took them all away; so will be the coming of the Son of man.
Then two men will be in the field; one is taken, and one let go;
Two women will be crushing grain; one is taken, and one let go.
Be watching, then! for you have no knowledge on what day your Lord will come.
But be certain of this, that if the master of the house had had knowledge of the time when the thief was coming, he would have been watching, and would not have let his house be broken into.
Be ready then; for at a time which you have no thought of the Son of man will come.
Who is the true and wise servant, whom his lord has put over those in his house, to give them their food at the right time?
A blessing on that servant, who will be doing so when his lord comes.
Truly, I say to you, he will put him over all he has.
But if that evil servant says in his heart, My lord is a long time in coming;
And is cruel to the other servants, taking his pleasure with those who are overcome with wine;
The lord of that servant will come in a day when he is not looking for him, and in an hour of which he has no knowledge,
And will have him cut in two, and will give him a part in the fate of the false ones: there will be weeping and cries of sorrow.
Then the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins, the friends of the bride, who took their lights, and went out with the purpose of meeting the husband.
And five of them were foolish, and five were wise.
For the foolish, when they took their lights, took no oil with them.
But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lights.
Now the husband was a long time in coming, and they all went to sleep.
But in the middle of the night there is a cry, The husband comes! Go out to him.
Then all those virgins got up, and made ready their lights.
And the foolish said to the wise, Give us of your oil; for our lights are going out.
But the wise made answer, saying, There may not be enough for us and you; it would be better for you to go to the traders and get oil for yourselves.
And while they went to get oil, the master came; and those who were ready went in with him to the feast: and the door was shut.
After that the other virgins came, saying, Lord, Lord, let us in.
But he made answer and said, Truly I say to you, I have no knowledge of you.
Keep watch, then, because you are not certain of the day or of the hour.
For it is as when a man, about to take a journey, got his servants together, and gave them his property.
And to one he gave five talents, to another two, to another one; to everyone as he was able; and he went on his journey.
Straight away he who had been given the five talents went and did trade with them, and made five more.
In the same way he who had been given the two got two more.
But he who was given the one went away and put it in a hole in the earth, and kept his lord's money in a secret place.
Now after a long time the lord of those servants comes, and makes up his account with them.
And he who had the five talents came with his other five talents, saying, Lord, you gave into my care five talents: see, I have got five more.
His lord said to him, Well done, good and true servant: you have been true in a small thing, I will give you control over great things: take your part in the joy of your lord.
And he who had the two talents came and said, Lord, you gave into my care two talents: see, I have got two more.
His lord said to him, Well done, good and true servant: you have been true in a small thing, I will give you control over great things: take your part in the joy of your lord.
And he who had had the one talent came and said, Lord, I had knowledge that you are a hard man, getting in grain where you have not put seed, and making profits for which you have done no work:
And I was in fear, and went away, and put your talent in the earth: here is what is yours.
But his lord in answer said to him, You are a bad and unready servant; if you had knowledge that I get in grain where I did not put seed, and make profits for which I have done no work,
Why, then, did you not put my money in the bank, and at my coming I would have got back what is mine with interest?
Take away, then, his talent and give it to him who has the ten talents.
For to everyone who has will be given, and he will have more: but from him who has not, even what he has will be taken away.
And put out the servant who is of no profit into the outer dark: there will be weeping and cries of sorrow.
But when the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then will he be seated in his glory:
And before him all the nations will come together; and they will be parted one from another, as the sheep are parted from the goats by the keeper.
And he will put the sheep on his right, but the goats on the left.
Then will the King say to those on his right, Come, you who have the blessing of my Father, into the kingdom made ready for you before the world was:
For I was in need of food, and you gave it to me: I was in need of drink, and you gave it to me: I was wandering, and you took me in;
I had no clothing, and you gave it to me: when I was ill, or in prison, you came to me.
Then will the upright make answer to him, saying, Lord, when did we see you in need of food, and give it to you? or in need of drink, and give it to you?
And when did we see you wandering, and take you in? or without clothing, and give it to you?
And when did we see you ill, or in prison, and come to you?
And the King will make answer and say to them, Truly I say to you, Because you did it to the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.
Then will he say to those on the left, Go from me, you cursed ones, into the eternal fire which is ready for the Evil One and his angels:
For I was in need of food, and you gave it not to me; I was in need of drink, and you gave it not to me:
I was wandering, and you took me not in; without clothing, and you gave me no clothing; ill, and in prison, and you came not to me.
Then will they make answer, saying, Lord, when did we see you in need of food or drink, or wandering, or without clothing, or ill, or in prison, and did not take care of you?
Then will he make answer to them, saying, Truly I say to you, Because you did it not to the least of these, you did it not to me.
And these will go away into eternal punishment; but the upright into eternal life.
And when Jesus had come to the end of all these words, he said to his disciples,
After two days is the Passover, and the Son of man will be given up to the death of the cross.
Then the chief priests and the rulers of the people came together in the house of the high priest, who was named Caiaphas.
And they made designs together to take Jesus by some trick, and put him to death.
But they said, Not while the feast is going on, for fear of trouble among the people.
Now when Jesus was in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper,
There came to him a woman having a bottle of perfume of great price, and she put the perfume on his head when he was seated at table.
But when the disciples saw it they were angry, saying, To what purpose is this waste?
For we might have got much money for this and given it to the poor.
But Jesus, seeing it, said to them, Why are you troubling the woman? she has done a kind act to me.
For the poor you have ever with you, but me you have not for ever.
For in putting this perfume on my body, she did it to make me ready for my last resting-place.
Truly I say to you, Wherever this good news goes out in all the world, what this woman has done will be talked of in memory of her.
Then one of the twelve, who was named Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests and said,
What will you give me, if I give him up to you? And the price was fixed at thirty bits of silver.
And from that time he was watching for a chance to give him into their hands.
Now on the first day of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Where are we to make ready for you to take the Passover meal?
And he said to them, Go into the town to such a man, and say to him, The Master says, My time is near: I will keep the Passover at your house with my disciples.
And the disciples did as Jesus had said to them; and they made ready the Passover.
Now when evening was come, he was seated at table with the twelve disciples;
And while they were taking food, he said, Truly I say to you that one of you will be false to me.
And they were very said, and said to him, one by one, Is it I, Lord?
And he made answer and said, He who puts his hand into the plate with me, the same will be false to me.
The Son of man goes, even as the Writings say of him: but a curse is on that man through whom the Son of man is given up; it would have been well for that man if he had never come into the world.
And Judas, who was false to him, made answer and said, Is it I, Master? He says to him, Yes.
And when they were taking food, Jesus took bread and, after blessing it, he gave the broken bread to the disciples and said, Take it; this is my body.
And he took a cup and, having given praise, he gave it to them, saying,
Take of it, all of you, for this is my blood of the testament, which is given for men for the forgiveness of sins.
But I say to you that from now I will not take of this fruit of the vine, till that day when I take it new with you in my Father's kingdom.
And after a song of praise to God, they went out to the Mountain of Olives.
Then said Jesus to them, All of you will be turned away from me this night: for it is said in the Writings, I will put to death the keeper of the sheep, and the sheep of the flock will be put to flight.
But after I am come back from the dead, I will go before you into Galilee.
But Peter made answer and said to him, Though all may be turned away from you, I will never be turned away.
Jesus said to him, Truly I say to you that this night, before the hour of the cock's cry, you will say three times that you have no knowledge of me.
Peter says to him, Even if I am put to death with you, I will not be false to you. So said all the disciples.
Then comes Jesus with them to a place named Gethsemane, and says to his disciples, Be seated here, while I go over there for prayer.
And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and became sad and very troubled.
Then says he to them, My soul is very sad, even to death: keep watch with me here.
And he went forward a little, and falling down on his face in prayer, he said, O my Father, if it is possible, let this cup go from me; but let not my pleasure, but yours be done.
And he comes to the disciples, and sees that they are sleeping, and says to Peter, What, were you not able to keep watch with me one hour?
Keep watch with prayer, so that you may not be put to the test: the spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is feeble.
Again, a second time he went away, and said in prayer, O my Father, if this may not go from me without my taking it, let your pleasure be done.
And he came again and saw them sleeping, for their eyes were tired.
And he went away from them again, and a third time said the same prayer.
Then he comes to the disciples; and says to them, Go on sleeping now, and take your rest: for the hour is come, and the Son of man is given into the hands of evil men.
Up, let us be going: see, he who gives me up is near.
And while he was still talking, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a band armed with swords and sticks, from the chief priests and those in authority over the people.
Now the false one had given them a sign saying, The one to whom I give a kiss, that is he: take him.
And straight away he came to Jesus and said, Master! and gave him a kiss.
And Jesus said to him, Friend, do that for which you have come. Then they came and put hands on Jesus, and took him.
And one of those who were with Jesus put out his hand, and took out his sword and gave the servant of the high priest a blow, cutting off his ear.
Then says Jesus to him, Put up your sword again into its place: for all those who take the sword will come to death by the sword.
Does it not seem possible to you that if I make request to my Father he will even now send me an army of angels?
But how then would the Writings come true, which say that so it has to be?
In that hour Jesus said to the people, Have you come out as against a thief with swords and sticks to take me? I was teaching every day in the Temple and you took me not.
But all this has taken place so that the writings of the prophets might come true. Then all his disciples went from him in flight.
And those who had made Jesus prisoner took him away to the house of Caiaphas, the high priest, where the scribes and those in authority over the people had come together.
But Peter went after him at a distance, to the house of the high priest, and went in and took his seat with the servants, to see the end.
Now the chief priests and all the Sanhedrin were looking for false witness against Jesus, so that they might put him to death;
And they were not able to get it, though a number of false witnesses came.
But later there came two who said, This man said, I am able to give the Temple of God to destruction, and to put it up again in three days.
And the high priest got up and said to him, Have you no answer? what is it which these say against you?
But Jesus said not a word. And the high priest said to him, I put you on oath, by the living God, that you will say to us if you are the Christ, the Son of God.
Jesus says to him, You say so: but I say to you, From now you will see the Son of man seated at the right hand of power, and coming on the clouds of heaven.
Then the high priest, violently parting his robes, said, He has said evil against God: what more need have we of witnesses? for now his words against God have come to your ears:
What is your opinion? They made answer and said, It is right for him to be put to death.
Then they put shame on him, and were cruel to him: and some gave him blows, saying,
Be a prophet, O Christ, and say who gave you a blow!
Now Peter was seated in the open square outside the house: and a servant-girl came to him, saying, You were with Jesus the Galilaean.
But he said before them all that it was false, saying, I have no knowledge of what you say.
And when he had gone out into the doorway, another saw him and says to those who were there, This man was with Jesus the Nazarene.
And again he said with an oath, I have no knowledge of the man.
And after a little time those who were near came and said to Peter, Truly you are one of them; because your talk is witness against you.
Then with curses and oaths he said, I have no knowledge of the man. And straight away there came the cry of a cock.
And the word of Jesus came back to Peter, when he said, Before the hour of the cock's cry, you will say three times that you have no knowledge of me. And he went out, weeping bitterly.
Now when it was morning, all the chief priests and those in authority took thought together with the purpose of putting Jesus to death.
And they put cords on him and took him away, and gave him up to Pilate, the ruler.
Then Judas, who was false to him, seeing that he was to be put to death, in his regret took back the thirty bits of silver to the chief priests and those in authority,
Saying, I have done wrong in giving into your hands an upright man. But they said, What is that to us? it is your business.
And he put down the silver in the Temple and went out, and put himself to death by hanging.
And the chief priests took the silver and said, It is not right to put it in the Temple store for it is the price of blood.
And they made a decision to get with the silver the potter's field, as a place for the dead of other countries.
For this cause that field was named, The field of blood, to this day.
Then came true that which was said by Jeremiah the prophet, And they took the thirty bits of silver, the price of him who was valued by the children of Israel;
And they gave them for the potter's field, as I had word from the Lord.
And Jesus was before the ruler, who put a question to him, Are you the King of the Jews? And Jesus said to him, You say so.
But when the chief priests and those in authority made statements against him, he gave no answer.
Then says Pilate to him, Do you give no attention to what their witnesses say against you?
And he gave him no answer, not even a word: so that the ruler was greatly surprised.
Now at the feast it was the way for the ruler to let free to the people one prisoner, at their selection.
And they had then an important prisoner, whose name was Barabbas.
So when they came together, Pilate said to them, Whom will you have? Barabbas, or Jesus, who is named Christ?
For he saw that for envy they had given him up.
And while he was on the judge's seat, his wife sent to him, saying, Have nothing to do with that upright man, for I have had much trouble this day in a dream because of him.
Now the chief priests and those in authority got the people to make request for Barabbas, and for Jesus to be put to death.
But the ruler made answer and said to them, Which of the two is it your pleasure that I let go free? And they said, Barabbas.
Pilate says to them, What, then, am I to do with Jesus, who is named Christ? They all say, Let him be put to death on the cross.
And he said, Why, what evil has he done? But they gave loud cries, saying, To the cross with him!
So when Pilate saw that he was able to do nothing, but that trouble was working up, he took water and, washing his hands before the people, said, The blood of this upright man is not on my hands: you are responsible.
And all the people made answer and said, Let his blood be on us, and on our children.
Then he let Barabbas go free: but after having Jesus whipped, he gave him up to be put to death on the cross.
Then the ruler's armed men took Jesus into the open square, and got all their band together.
And they took off his clothing, and put on him a red robe.
And they made a crown of thorns and put it on his head, and put a rod in his right hand, and they went down on their knees before him, and made sport of him, saying, Long life to the King of the Jews.
And they put shame on him, and gave him blows on the head with the rod.
And when they had made sport of him, they took the robe off him, and put his clothing on him, and took him away to put him on the cross.
And while they were coming out, they saw a man of Cyrene, Simon by name, and they made him go with them, so that he might take up his cross.
And when they came to the place named Golgotha, that is to say, Dead Man's Head,
They gave him wine mixed with bitter drink: and after tasting it, he took no more.
And when they had put him on the cross, they made division of his clothing among them by the decision of chance.
And they were seated there watching him.
And they put up over his head the statement of his crime in writing, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
Then two thieves were put on crosses with him, one on the right and one on the left.
And those who went by said bitter words to him, shaking their heads and saying,
You who would give the Temple to destruction and put it up again in three days, get yourself free: if you are the Son of God, come down from the cross.
In the same way, the chief priests, making sport of him, with the scribes and those in authority, said,
A saviour of others, he has no salvation for himself. If he is the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will have faith in him.
He put his faith in God; let God be his saviour now, if he will have him; for he said, I am the Son of God.
And the thieves who were on the crosses said evil words to him.
Now from the sixth hour it was dark over all the land till the ninth hour.
And about the ninth hour Jesus gave a loud cry, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is, My God, my God, why are you turned away from me?
And some of those who were near by, hearing it, said, This man is crying to Elijah.
And straight away one of them went quickly, and took a sponge, and made it full of bitter wine, and put it on a rod and gave him drink.
And the rest said, Let him be; let us see if Elijah will come to his help.
And Jesus gave another loud cry, and gave up his spirit.
And the curtain of the Temple was parted in two from end to end; and there was an earth-shock; and the rocks were broken;
And the resting-places of the dead came open; and the bodies of a number of sleeping saints came to life;
And coming out of their resting-places, after he had come again from the dead, they went into the holy town and were seen by a number of people.
Now the captain and those who were with him watching Jesus, when they saw the earth-shock and the things which were done, were in great fear and said, Truly this was a son of God.
And a number of women were there, watching from a distance, who had come with Jesus from Galilee, waiting on his needs.
Among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary, the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
And in the evening, there came a man of wealth from Arimathaea, Joseph by name, who was a disciple of Jesus:
This man went in to Pilate, and made a request for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate gave orders for it to be given to him.
And Joseph took the body, folding it in clean linen,
And put it in the resting-place which had been cut out of the rock for himself; and after rolling a great stone to the door of it he went away.
And Mary Magdalene was there, and the other Mary, seated by the place of the dead.
Now on the day after the getting ready of the Passover, the chief priests and Pharisees came together to Pilate,
Saying, Sir, we have in mind how that false man said, while he was still living, After three days I will come again from the dead.
Give orders, then, that the place where his body is may be made safe till the third day, for fear that his disciples come and take him away secretly and say to the people, He has come back from the dead: and the last error will be worse than the first.
Pilate said to them, You have watchmen; go and make it as safe as you are able.
So they went, and made safe the place where his body was, putting a stamp on the stone, and the watchmen were with them.
Now late on the Sabbath, when the dawn of the first day of the week was near, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the place where his body was.
And there was a great earth-shock; for an angel of the Lord came down from heaven and, rolling back the stone, took his seat on it.
His form was shining like the light, and his clothing was white as snow:
And for fear of him the watchmen were shaking, and became as dead men.
And the angel said to the women, Have no fear: for I see that you are searching for Jesus, who was put to death on the cross.
He is not here, for he has come to life again, even as he said. Come, see the Lord's resting-place.
And go quickly and give his disciples the news that he has come back from the dead, and is going before you into Galilee; there you will see him, as I have said to you.
And they went away quickly, with fear and great joy, to give his disciples the news.
And on the way, Jesus came to them, saying, Be glad. And they came and put their hands on his feet, and gave him worship.
Then said Jesus to them, Have no fear: go and give word to my brothers to go into Galilee, and there they will see me.
Now, while they were going, some of the watchmen came into the town and gave news to the chief priests of all the things which had taken place.
And when they had come together with those in authority, and had made their decision, they gave much money to the watchmen, saying,
Say, His disciples came by night and took him away secretly while we were sleeping.
And if this comes to the ruler's ears, we will see that he does not make you responsible.
So they took the money, and did as they had been ordered: and this account has been current among the Jews till the present time.
But the eleven disciples went into Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had given them orders to go.
And when they saw him they gave him worship: but some were in doubt.
And Jesus came to them and said, All authority has been given to me in heaven and on earth.
Go then, and make disciples of all the nations, giving them baptism in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit:
Teaching them to keep all the rules which I have given you: and see, I am ever with you, even to the end of the world.
And in those days John the Baptist came preaching in the waste land of Judaea,
Saying, Let your hearts be turned from sin; for the kingdom of heaven is near.
For this is he of whom Isaiah the prophet said, The voice of one crying in the waste land, Make ready the way of the Lord, make his roads straight.
Now John was clothed in camel's hair, with a leather band about him; and his food was locusts and honey.
Then Jerusalem and all Judaea went out to him, and all the people from near Jordan;
And they were given baptism by him in the river Jordan, saying openly that they had done wrong.
But when he saw a number of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them, Offspring of snakes, at whose word are you going in flight from the wrath to come?
Let your change of heart be seen in your works:
And say not to yourselves, We have Abraham for our father; because I say to you that God is able from these stones to make children for Abraham.
And even now the axe is put to the root of the trees; every tree then which does not give good fruit is cut down, and put into the fire.
Truly, I give baptism with water to those of you whose hearts are changed; but he who comes after me is greater than I, whose shoes I am not good enough to take up: he will give you baptism with the Holy Spirit and with fire:
In whose hand is the instrument with which he will make clean his grain; he will put the good grain in his store, but the waste will be burned up in the fire which will never be put out.
Then Jesus came from Galilee to John at the Jordan, to be given baptism by him.
But John would have kept him back, saying, It is I who have need of baptism from you, and do you come to me?
But Jesus made answer, saying to him, Let it be so now: because so it is right for us to make righteousness complete. Then he gave him baptism.
And Jesus, having been given baptism, straight away went up from the water; and, the heavens opening, he saw the Spirit of God coming down on him as a dove;
And a voice came out of heaven, saying, This is my dearly loved Son, with whom I am well pleased.
Then Jesus was sent by the Spirit into the waste land to be tested by the Evil One.
And after going without food for forty days and forty nights, he was in need of it.
And the Evil One came and said to him, If you are the Son of God, give the word for these stones to become bread.
But he made answer and said, It is in the Writings, Bread is not man's only need, but every word which comes out of the mouth of God.
Then the Evil One took him to the holy town; and he put him on the highest point of the Temple and said to him,
If you are the Son of God, let yourself go down; for it is in the Writings, He will give his angels care over you; and, In their hands they will keep you up, so that your foot may not be crushed against a stone.
Jesus said to him, Again it is in the Writings, You may not put the Lord your God to the test.
Again, the Evil One took him up to a very high mountain, and let him see all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them;
And he said to him, All these things will I give you, if you will go down on your face and give me worship.
Then said Jesus to him, Away, Satan: for it is in the Writings, Give worship to the Lord your God and be his servant only.
Then the Evil One went away from him, and angels came and took care of him.
Now when it came to his ears that John had been put in prison, he went away to Galilee;
And going away from Nazareth, he came and made his living-place in Capernaum, which is by the sea, in the country of Zebulun and Naphtali:
So that the word of the prophet Isaiah might come true,
The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, by the way of the sea, the other side of Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles,
The people who were in the dark saw a great light, and to those in the land of the shade of death did the dawn come up.
From that time Jesus went about preaching and saying, Let your hearts be turned from sin, for the kingdom of heaven is near.
And when he was walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon, whose other name was Peter, and Andrew, his brother, who were putting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen.
And he said to them, Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men.
And straight away they let go the nets and went after him.
And going on from there he saw two other brothers, James, the son of Zebedee, and John, his brother, in the boat with their father, stitching up their nets; and he said, Come.
And they went straight from the boat and their father and came after him.
And Jesus went about in all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues and preaching the good news of the kingdom, and making well those who were ill with any disease among the people.
And news of him went out through all Syria; and they took to him all who were ill with different diseases and pains, those having evil spirits and those who were off their heads, and those who had no power of moving. And he made them well.
And there went after him great numbers from Galilee and Decapolis and Jerusalem and Judaea and from the other side of Jordan.
And seeing great masses of people he went up into the mountain; and when he was seated his disciples came to him.
And with these words he gave them teaching, saying,
Happy are the poor in spirit: for the kingdom of heaven is theirs.
Happy are those who are sad: for they will be comforted.
Happy are the gentle: for the earth will be their heritage.
Happy are those whose heart's desire is for righteousness: for they will have their desire.
Happy are those who have mercy: for they will be given mercy.
Happy are the clean in heart: for they will see God.
Happy are the peacemakers: for they will be named sons of God.
Happy are those who are attacked on account of righteousness: for the kingdom of heaven will be theirs.
Happy are you when men give you a bad name, and are cruel to you, and say all evil things against you falsely, because of me.
Be glad and full of joy; for great is your reward in heaven: for so were the prophets attacked who were before you.
You are the salt of the earth; but if its taste goes from the salt, how will you make it salt again? it is then good for nothing but to be put out and crushed under foot by men.
You are the light of the world. A town put on a hill may be seen by all.
And a burning light is not put under a vessel, but on its table; so that its rays may be shining on all who are in the house.
Even so let your light be shining before men, so that they may see your good works and give glory to your Father in heaven.
Let there be no thought that I have come to put an end to the law or the prophets. I have not come for destruction, but to make complete.
Truly I say to you, Till heaven and earth come to an end, not the smallest letter or part of a letter will in any way be taken from the law, till all things are done.
Whoever then goes against the smallest of these laws, teaching men to do the same, will be named least in the kingdom of heaven; but he who keeps the laws, teaching others to keep them, will be named great in the kingdom of heaven.
For I say to you, If your righteousness is not greater than the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, you will never go into the kingdom of heaven.
You have knowledge that it was said in old times, You may not put to death; and, Whoever puts to death will be in danger of being judged:
But I say to you that everyone who is angry with his brother will be in danger of being judged; and he who says to his brother, Raca, will be in danger from the Sanhedrin; and whoever says, You foolish one, will be in danger of the hell of fire.
If then you are making an offering at the altar and there it comes to your mind that your brother has something against you,
While your offering is still before the altar, first go and make peace with your brother, then come and make your offering.
Come to an agreement quickly with him who has a cause against you at law, while you are with him on the way, for fear that he may give you up to the judge and the judge may give you to the police and you may be put into prison.
Truly I say to you, You will not come out from there till you have made payment of the very last farthing.
You have knowledge that it was said, You may not have connection with another man's wife:
But I say to you that everyone whose eyes are turned on a woman with desire has had connection with her in his heart.
And if your right eye is a cause of trouble to you, take it out and put it away from you; because it is better to undergo the loss of one part, than for all your body to go into hell.
And if your right hand is a cause of trouble to you, let it be cut off and put it away from you; because it is better to undergo the loss of one part, than for all your body to go into hell.
Again, it was said, Whoever puts away his wife has to give her a statement in writing for this purpose:
But I say to you that everyone who puts away his wife for any other cause but the loss of her virtue, makes her false to her husband; and whoever takes her as his wife after she is put away, is no true husband to her.
Again, you have knowledge that it was said in old times, Do not take false oaths, but give effect to your oaths to the Lord:
But I say to you, Take no oaths at all: not by the heaven, because it is the seat of God;
Or by the earth, because it is the resting-place for his foot; or by Jerusalem, because it is the town of the great King.
You may not take an oath by your head, because you are not able to make one hair white or black.
But let your words be simply, Yes or No: and whatever is more than these is of the Evil One.
You have knowledge that it was said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth:
But I say to you, Do not make use of force against an evil man; but to him who gives you a blow on the right side of your face let the left be turned.
And if any man goes to law with you and takes away your coat, do not keep back your robe from him.
And whoever makes you go one mile, go with him two.
Give to him who comes with a request, and keep not your property from him who would for a time make use of it.
You have knowledge that it was said, Have love for your neighbour, and hate for him who is against you:
But I say to you, Have love for those who are against you, and make prayer for those who are cruel to you;
So that you may be the sons of your Father in heaven; for his sun gives light to the evil and to the good, and he sends rain on the upright man and on the sinner.
For if you have love for those who have love for you, what credit is it to you? do not the tax-farmers the same?
And if you say, Good day, to your brothers only, what do you do more than others? do not even the Gentiles the same?
Be then complete in righteousness, even as your Father in heaven is complete.
Take care not to do your good works before men, to be seen by them; or you will have no reward from your Father in heaven.
When then you give money to the poor, do not make a noise about it, as the false-hearted men do in the Synagogues and in the streets, so that they may have glory from men. Truly, I say to you, They have their reward.
But when you give money, let not your left hand see what your right hand does:
So that your giving may be in secret; and your Father, who sees in secret, will give you your reward.
And when you make your prayers, be not like the false-hearted men, who take pleasure in getting up and saying their prayers in the Synagogues and at the street turnings so that they may be seen by men. Truly I say to you, They have their reward.
But when you make your prayer, go into your private room, and, shutting the door, say a prayer to your Father in secret, and your Father, who sees in secret, will give you your reward.
And in your prayer do not make use of the same words again and again, as the Gentiles do: for they have the idea that God will give attention to them because of the number of their words.
So be not like them; because your Father has knowledge of your needs even before you make your requests to him.
Let this then be your prayer: Our Father in heaven, may your name be kept holy.
Let your kingdom come. Let your pleasure be done, as in heaven, so on earth.
Give us this day bread for our needs.
And make us free of our debts, as we have made those free who are in debt to us.
And let us not be put to the test, but keep us safe from the Evil One.
For if you let men have forgiveness for their sins, you will have forgiveness from your Father in heaven.
But if you do not let men have forgiveness for their sins, you will not have forgiveness from your Father for your sins.
And when you go without food, be not sad-faced as the false-hearted are. For they go about with changed looks, so that men may see that they are going without food. Truly I say to you, They have their reward.
But when you go without food, put oil on your head and make your face clean;
So that no one may see that you are going without food, but your Father in secret; and your Father, who sees in secret, will give you your reward.
Make no store of wealth for yourselves on earth, where it may be turned to dust by worms and weather, and where thieves may come in by force and take it away.
But make a store for yourselves in heaven, where it will not be turned to dust and where thieves do not come in to take it away:
For where your wealth is, there will your heart be.
The light of the body is the eye; if then your eye is true, all your body will be full of light.
But if your eye is evil, all your body will be dark. If then the light which is in you is dark, how dark it will be!
No man is able to be a servant to two masters: for he will have hate for the one and love for the other, or he will keep to one and have no respect for the other. You may not be servants of God and of wealth.
So I say to you, Take no thought for your life, about food or drink, or about clothing for your body. Is not life more than food, and the body more than its clothing?
See the birds of heaven; they do not put seeds in the earth, they do not get in grain, or put it in store-houses; and your Father in heaven gives them food. Are you not of much more value than they?
And which of you by taking thought is able to make himself a cubit taller?
And why are you troubled about clothing? See the flowers of the field, how they come up; they do no work, they make no thread:
But I say to you that even Solomon in all his glory was not clothed like one of these.
But if God gives such clothing to the grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is put into the oven, will he not much more give you clothing, O you of little faith?
Then do not be full of care, saying, What are we to have for food or drink? or, With what may we be clothed?
Because the Gentiles go in search of all these things: for your Father in heaven has knowledge that you have need of all these things:
But let your first care be for his kingdom and his righteousness; and all these other things will be given to you in addition.
Then have no care for tomorrow: tomorrow will take care of itself. Take the trouble of the day as it comes.
Be not judges of others, and you will not be judged.
For as you have been judging, so you will be judged, and with your measure will it be measured to you.
And why do you take note of the grain of dust in your brother's eye, but take no note of the bit of wood which is in your eye?
Or how will you say to your brother, Let me take out the grain of dust from your eye, when you yourself have a bit of wood in your eye?
You false one, first take out the bit of wood from your eye, then will you see clearly to take out the grain of dust from your brother's eye.
Do not give that which is holy to the dogs, or put your jewels before pigs, for fear that they will be crushed under foot by the pigs whose attack will then be made against you.
Make a request, and it will be answered; what you are searching for you will get; give the sign, and the door will be open to you:
Because to everyone who makes a request, it will be given; and he who is searching will get his desire, and to him who gives the sign, the door will be open.
Or which of you, if his son makes a request for bread, will give him a stone?
Or if he makes a request for a fish, will give him a snake?
If you, then, being evil, are able to give good things to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good things to those who make requests to him?
All those things, then, which you would have men do to you, even so do you to them: because this is the law and the prophets.
Go in by the narrow door; for wide is the door and open is the way which goes to destruction, and great numbers go in by it.
For narrow is the door and hard the road to life, and only a small number make discovery of it.
Be on the watch for false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inside they are cruel wolves.
By their fruits you will get knowledge of them. Do men get grapes from thorns or figs from thistles?
Even so, every good tree gives good fruit; but the bad tree gives evil fruit.
It is not possible for a good tree to give bad fruit, and a bad tree will not give good fruit.
Every tree which does not give good fruit is cut down and put in the fire.
So by their fruits you will get knowledge of them.
Not everyone who says to me, Lord, Lord, will go into the kingdom of heaven; but he who does the pleasure of my Father in heaven.
A great number will say to me on that day, Lord, Lord, were we not prophets in your name, and did we not by your name send out evil spirits, and by your name do works of power?
And then will I say to them, I never had knowledge of you: go from me, you workers of evil.
Everyone, then, to whom my words come and who does them, will be like a wise man who made his house on a rock;
And the rain came down and there was a rush of waters and the winds were driving against that house, but it was not moved; because it was based on the rock.
And everyone to whom my words come and who does them not, will be like a foolish man who made his house on sand;
And the rain came down and there was a rush of waters and the winds were driving against that house; and it came down and great was its fall.
And it came about, when Jesus had come to the end of these words, that the people were surprised at his teaching,
for he was teaching as one having authority, and not as their scribes.
And when he had come down from the mountain, great numbers of people came after him.
And a leper came and gave him worship, saying, Lord, if it is your pleasure, you have power to make me clean.
And he put his hand on him, saying, It is my pleasure; be clean. And straight away he was made clean.
And Jesus said to him, See that you say nothing about this to anyone; but go and let the priest see you and make the offering which was ordered by Moses, for a witness to them.
And when Jesus was come into Capernaum, a certain captain came to him with a request,
Saying, Lord, my servant is ill in bed at the house, with no power in his body, and in great pain.
And he said to him, I will come and make him well.
And the captain in answer said, Lord, I am not good enough for you to come under my roof; but only say the word, and my servant will be made well.
Because I myself am a man under authority, having under me fighting men; and I say to this one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my servant, Do this, and he does it.
And when these words came to the ears of Jesus he was surprised, and said to those who came after him, Truly I say to you, I have not seen such great faith, no, not in Israel.
And I say to you that numbers will come from the east and the west, and will take their seats with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven:
But the sons of the kingdom will be put out into the dark, and there will be weeping and cries of pain.
And Jesus said to the captain, Go in peace; as your faith is, so let it be done to you. And the servant was made well in that hour.
And when Jesus had come into Peter's house, he saw his wife's mother in bed, very ill.
And he put his hand on hers and the disease went from her, and she got up and took care of his needs.
And in the evening, they took to him a number of people who had evil spirits; and he sent the spirits out of them with a word, and made well all who were ill;
So that the word of Isaiah the prophet might come true: He himself took our pains and our diseases.
Now when Jesus saw a great mass of people about him, he gave an order to go to the other side.
And there came a scribe and said to him, Master, I will come after you wherever you go.
And Jesus said to him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of heaven have a resting-place; but the Son of man has nowhere to put his head.
And another of the disciples said to him, Lord, let me first go and give the last honours to my father.
But Jesus said to him, Come after me; and let the dead take care of their dead.
And when he had got into a boat, his disciples went after him.
And there came up a great storm in the sea, so that the boat was covered with the waves: but he was sleeping.
And they came to him, and, awaking him, said, Help, Lord; destruction is near.
And he said to them, Why are you full of fear, O you of little faith? Then he got up and gave orders to the winds and the sea; and there was a great calm.
And the men were full of wonder, saying, What sort of man is this, that even the winds and the sea do his orders?
And when he had come to the other side, to the country of the Gadarenes, there came out to him from the place of the dead, two who had evil spirits, so violent that no man was able to go that way.
And they gave a loud cry, saying, What have we to do with you, you Son of God? Have you come here to give us punishment before the time?
Now there was, some distance away, a great herd of pigs taking their food.
And the evil spirits made strong prayers to him, saying, If you send us out, let us go into the herd of pigs.
And he said to them, Go. And they came out, and went into the pigs; and the herd went rushing down a sharp slope into the sea and came to their end in the water.
And their keepers went in flight to the town and gave an account of everything, and of the men who had the evil spirits.
And all the town came out to Jesus; and seeing him they made request that he would go away from their part of the country.
And he got into a boat and went across and came to his town.
And they took to him a man stretched on a bed who had no power of moving; and Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the man who was ill, Son, take heart; you have forgiveness for your sins.
And some of the scribes said among themselves, This man has no respect for God.
And Jesus, having knowledge of what was in their minds, said, Why are your thoughts evil?
For which is the simpler, to say, You have forgiveness for your sins; or to say, Get up and go?
But so that you may see that on earth the Son of man has authority for the forgiveness of sins, (then said he to the man who was ill,) Get up, and take up your bed, and go to your house.
And he got up and went away to his house.
But when the people saw it they were full of fear, and gave glory to God who had given such authority to men.
And when Jesus was going from there, he saw a man whose name was Matthew, seated at the place where taxes were taken; and he said to him, Come after me. And he got up and went after him.
And it came about, when he was in the house taking food, that a number of tax-farmers and sinners came and took their places with Jesus and his disciples.
And when the Pharisees saw it, they said to his disciples, Why does your Master take food with tax-farmers and sinners?
But on hearing this he said, Those who are well have no need of a medical man, but those who are ill.
But go and take to heart the sense of these words, My desire is for mercy, not offerings: for I have come not to get the upright, but sinners.
Then the disciples of John came to him, saying, Why do we and the Pharisees frequently go without food, but your disciples do not?
And Jesus said to them, Will the friends of the newly-married man be sad as long as he is with them? But the days will come when he will be taken away from them, and then will they go without food.
And no man puts a bit of new cloth on an old coat, for by pulling away from the old, it makes a worse hole.
And men do not put new wine into old wine-skins; or the skins will be burst and the wine will come out, and the skins are of no more use: but they put new wine into new wine-skins, and so the two will be safe.
While he was saying these things to them, there came a ruler and gave him worship, saying, My daughter is even now dead; but come and put your hand on her, and she will come back to life.
And Jesus got up and went after him, and so did his disciples.
And a woman, who for twelve years had had a flow of blood, came after him, and put her hand on the edge of his robe:
Because, she said to herself, if I may but put my hand on his robe, I will be made well.
But Jesus, turning and seeing her, said, Daughter, take heart; your faith has made you well. And the woman was made well from that hour.
And when Jesus came into the ruler's house and saw the players with their instruments and the people making a noise,
He said, Make room; for the girl is not dead, but sleeping. And they were laughing at him.
But when the people were sent out, he went in and took her by the hand; and the girl got up.
And the news of it went out into all that land.
And when Jesus went on from there, two blind men came after him, crying out, Have mercy on us, you Son of David.
And when he had come into the house, the blind men came to him; and Jesus said to them, Have you faith that I am able to do this? They said to him, Yes, Lord.
Then he put his hand on their eyes, saying, As your faith is, let it be done to you.
And their eyes were made open. And Jesus said to them sharply, Let no man have knowledge of it.
But they went out and gave news of him in all that land.
And while they were going away, there came to him a man without the power of talking, and with an evil spirit.
And when the evil spirit had been sent out, the man had the power of talking: and they were all surprised, saying, Such a thing has never been seen in Israel.
But the Pharisees said, By the ruler of evil spirits, he sends evil spirits out of men.
And Jesus went about all the towns and small places, teaching in their Synagogues and preaching the good news of the kingdom and making well all sorts of disease and pain.
But when he saw all the people he was moved with pity for them, because they were troubled and wandering like sheep without a keeper.
Then he said to his disciples, There is much grain but not enough men to get it in.
Make prayer, then, to the Lord of the grain-fields, that he may send out workers to get in his grain.
The first words of the good news of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
Even as it is said in the book of Isaiah the prophet, See, I send my servant before your face, who will make ready your way;
The voice of one crying in the waste land, Make ready the way of the Lord, make his roads straight;
John came, and gave baptism in the waste land, preaching baptism as a sign of forgiveness of sin for those whose hearts were changed.
And there went out to him all the people of Judaea, and all those of Jerusalem, and they were given baptism by him in the river Jordan, saying that they were sinners.
And John was clothed in camel's hair, with a leather band about him; and his food was locusts and honey.
And he said to them all, There is one coming after me who is greater than I, whose shoes I am not good enough to undo.
I have given you baptism with water, but he will give you baptism with the Holy Spirit.
And it came about in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was given baptism by John in the Jordan.
And straight away, coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens broken open and the Spirit coming down on him as a dove:
And a voice came out of heaven, You are my dearly loved Son, with whom I am well pleased.
And straight away the Spirit sent him out into the waste land.
And he was in the waste land for forty days, being tested by Satan; and he was with the beasts; and the angels took care of him.
Now after John had been put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the good news of God,
And saying, The time has come, and the kingdom of God is near: let your hearts be turned from sin and have faith in the good news.
And going by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon, and Andrew, the brother of Simon, putting a net into the sea: for they were fishermen.
And Jesus said to them, Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men.
And they went straight from their nets, and came after him.
And going on a little farther, he saw James, the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, who were in their boat stitching up their nets.
And he said, Come after me: and they went away from their father Zebedee, who was in the boat with the servants, and came after him.
And they came to Capernaum; and on the Sabbath he went into the Synagogue and gave teaching.
And they were full of wonder at his teaching, because he gave it as one having authority, and not like the scribes.
And there was in their Synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and he gave a cry,
Saying, What have we to do with you, Jesus of Nazareth? have you come to put an end to us? I see well who you are, the Holy One of God.
And Jesus said to him sharply, Be quiet, and come out of him.
And the unclean spirit, shaking him violently, and crying with a loud voice, came out of him.
And they were all greatly surprised, so that they put questions to one another, saying, What is this? a new teaching! with authority he gives orders even to the unclean spirits, and they do what he says.
And news of him went out quickly everywhere into all parts of Galilee round about.
And when they came out of the Synagogue, they went into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.
Now Simon's wife's mother was ill, with a burning heat; and they gave him word of her:
And he came and took her by the hand, lifting her up; and she became well, and took care of their needs.
And in the evening, at sundown, they took to him all who were diseased, and those who had evil spirits.
And all the town had come together at the door.
And a number, who were ill with different diseases, he made well, and sent out evil spirits; but he did not let the evil spirits say anything, because they had knowledge of him.
And in the morning, a long time before daylight, he got up and went out to a quiet place, and there he gave himself up to prayer.
And Simon and those who were with him came after him.
And when they came up with him, they said to him, Everyone is looking for you.
And he said to them, Let us go to other parts into the nearest towns, so that I may give teaching there, because for this purpose I came.
And he went into their Synagogues in every part of Galilee, preaching and driving out evil spirits.
And a leper came to him and, going down on his knees before him, made a request, saying, If it is your pleasure, you have the power to make me clean.
And being moved with pity, he put out his hand, and touching him said to him, It is my pleasure; be made clean.
And straight away the disease went from him, and he was made clean.
And he sent him away, saying to him very sharply,
See that you say nothing to any man: but go and let the priest see you, and make yourself clean by an offering of the things ordered by Moses, for a witness to them.
But he went out, and made it public, giving an account of it everywhere, so that Jesus was no longer able to go openly into a town, but was outside in the waste land; and they came to him from every part.
And he got up, and went into the country of Judaea on the other side of Jordan: and great numbers of people came together to him again; and, as was his way, he gave them teaching.
And Pharisees came to him, testing him with the question, Is it right for a man to put away his wife?
And he said to them in answer, What did Moses say you were to do?
And they said to him, Moses let us give her a statement in writing, and be free from her.
But Jesus said to them, Because of your hard hearts he gave you this law.
But from the first, male and female made he them.
For this cause will a man go away from his father and mother, and be joined to his wife;
And the two will become one flesh; so that they are no longer two, but one flesh.
Let not that which has been joined together by God be parted by man.
And in the house the disciples put questions to him again about this thing.
And he said to them, Whoever puts away his wife and takes another, is false to his wife;
And if she herself puts away her husband and takes another, she is false to her husband.
And they took to him little children, so that he might put his hands on them: and the disciples said sharp words to them.
And when Jesus saw it, he was angry, and said to them, Let the little children come to me, and do not keep them away; for of such is the kingdom of God.
Truly I say to you, Whoever does not put himself under the kingdom of God like a little child, will not come into it at all.
And he took them in his arms, and gave them a blessing, putting his hands on them.
And while he was going out into the way, a man came running to him, and went down on his knees, saying, Good Master, what have I to do so that I may have eternal life?
And Jesus said to him, Why do you say I am good? no one is good but one, and that is God.
You have knowledge of what is said in the law, Do not put any one to death, Do not be untrue in married life, Do not take what is not yours, Do not give false witness, Do not get money by deceit, Give honour to your father and mother.
And he said to him, Master, all these laws I have kept from the time when I was young.
And Jesus, looking on him and loving him, said, There is one thing needed: go, get money for your goods, and give it to the poor, and you will have wealth in heaven: and come with me.
But his face became sad at the saying, and he went away sorrowing: for he was one who had much property.
And Jesus, looking round about, said to his disciples, How hard it is for those who have wealth to come into the kingdom of God!
And the disciples were full of wonder at his words. But Jesus said to them again, Children, how hard it is for those who put faith in wealth to come into the kingdom of God!
It is simpler for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a man of wealth to come into the kingdom of God.
And they were greatly surprised, saying to him, Who then may have salvation?
Jesus, looking on them, said, With men it is impossible, but not with God: for all things are possible with God.
Peter said to him, See, we have given up everything, and come after you.
Jesus said, Truly I say to you, There is no man who has given up house, or brothers, or sisters, or mother, or father, or children, or land, because of me and the good news,
Who will not get a hundred times as much now in this time, houses, and brothers, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and land--though with great troubles; and, in the world to come, eternal life.
But a great number who are first will be last: and those who are last will be first.
And they were on the way, going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus was going before them: and they were full of wonder; but those who came after him were in fear. And again he took the twelve, and gave them word of the things which were to come on him,
Saying, See, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man will be given up to the chief priests and the scribes; and they will give an order for his death, and will give him up to the Gentiles:
And they will make sport of him, and put shame on him, and give him cruel blows, and will put him to death; and after three days he will come back from the dead.
And there came to him James and John, the sons of Zebedee, saying to him, Master, will you give us whatever may be our request?
And he said to them, What would you have me do for you?
And they said to him, Let us be seated, one at your right hand and one at your left, in your glory.
But Jesus said to them, You have no knowledge of what you are saying. Are you able to take of my cup? or to undergo the baptism which I am to undergo?
And they said to him, We are able. And Jesus said to them, You will take of the cup from which I take; and the baptism which I am about to undergo you will undergo:
But to be seated at my right hand or at my left is not for me to give: but it is for those for whom it has been made ready.
And hearing this, the ten became very angry with James and John.
And Jesus made them come to him, and said to them, You see that those who are made rulers over the Gentiles are lords over them, and their great ones have authority over them.
But it is not so among you: but whoever has a desire to become great among you, let him be your servant:
And whoever has a desire to be first among you, let him be servant of all.
For truly the Son of man did not come to have servants, but to be a servant, and to give his life for the salvation of men.
And they came to Jericho: and when he was going out of Jericho, with his disciples and a great number of people, the son of Timaeus, Bartimaeus, a blind man, was seated by the wayside, with his hand out for money.
And when it came to his ears that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he gave a cry, and said, Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me.
And some of them, turning in protest, gave him an order to be quiet: but he went on crying out all the more, Son of David, have mercy on me.
And Jesus came to a stop and said, Let him come. And crying out to the blind man, they said to him, Be comforted: come, he has sent for you.
And he, putting off his coat, got up quickly, and came to Jesus.
And Jesus said to him, What would you have me do to you? And the blind man said, Master, make me able to see.
And Jesus said to him, Go on your way; your faith has made you well. And straight away he was able to see, and went after him in the way.
And when they came near to Jerusalem, to Beth-phage and Bethany, at the Mountain of Olives, he sent two of his disciples,
And said to them, Go into the little town opposite: and when you come to it, you will see a young ass with a cord round his neck, on which no man has ever been seated; let him loose, and come back with him.
And if anyone says to you, Why are you doing this? say, The Lord has need of him and will send him back straight away.
And they went away and saw a young ass by the door outside in the open street; and they were getting him loose.
And some of those who were there said to them, What are you doing, taking the ass?
And they said to them the words which Jesus had said; and they let them go.
And they took the young ass to Jesus, and put their clothing on him, and he got on his back.
And a great number put down their clothing in the way; and others put down branches which they had taken from the fields.
And those who went in front, and those who came after, were crying, Glory: A blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord:
A blessing on the coming kingdom of our father David: Glory in the highest.
And he went into Jerusalem into the Temple; and after looking round about on all things, it being now evening, he went out to Bethany with the twelve.
And on the day after, when they had come out from Bethany, he was in need of food.
And seeing a fig-tree in the distance with leaves, he went to see if by chance it had anything on it: and when he came to it, he saw nothing but leaves, for it was not the time for the fruit.
And he said to it, Let no man take fruit from you for ever. And his disciples took note of his words.
And they came to Jerusalem; and he went into the Temple, and sent out those who were trading there, overturning the tables of the money-changers and the seats of those who were offering doves for money;
And he would not let any man take a vessel through the Temple.
And he gave them teaching, and said to them, Is it not in the Writings, My house is to be named a house of prayer for all the nations? but you have made it a hole of thieves.
And it came to the ears of the chief priests and scribes, and they took thought how they might put him to death; being in fear of him, because all the people were full of wonder at his teaching.
And every evening he went out of the town.
And when they were going by in the morning, they saw the fig-tree dead from the roots.
And Peter, having a memory of it, said to him, Master, see, the tree which was cursed by you is dead.
And Jesus, answering, said to them, Have God's faith.
Truly I say to you, Whoever says to this mountain, Be taken up and be put into the sea; and has no doubt in his heart, but has faith that what he says will come about, he will have his desire.
For this reason I say to you, Whatever you make a request for in prayer, have faith that it has been given to you, and you will have it.
And whenever you make a prayer, let there be forgiveness in your hearts, if you have anything against anyone; so that you may have forgiveness for your sins from your Father who is in heaven.
[]
And they came again to Jerusalem: and while he was walking in the Temple, there came to him the chief priests and the scribes and those in authority:
And they said to him, By what authority do you do these things? or who gave you authority to do these things?
And Jesus said to them, I will put to you one question; give me an answer, and I will say by what authority I do these things.
The baptism of John, was it from heaven or from men? give me an answer.
And they gave thought to it among themselves, saying, If we say, From heaven; he will say, Why then did you not have faith in him?
But if we say, From men--they were in fear of the people, because all took John to be truly a prophet.
And they said in answer to Jesus, We have no idea. And Jesus said to them, And I will not say to you by what authority I do these things.
And he gave them teaching in the form of stories. A man had a vine-garden planted, and put a wall about it, and made a place for crushing out the wine, and put up a tower, and let it out to field-workers, and went into another country.
And when the time came, he sent a servant to get from the workmen some of the fruit of the garden.
And they took him, and gave him blows, and sent him away with nothing.
And again he sent to them another servant; and they gave him wounds on the head, and were very cruel to him.
And he sent another; and they put him to death: and a number of others, whipping some, and putting some to death.
He still had one, a dearly loved son: he sent him last to them, saying, They will have respect for my son.
But those workmen said among themselves, This is he who will one day be the owner of the property; come, let us put him to death, and the heritage will be ours.
And they took him and put him to death, pushing his body out of the garden.
What then will the master of the garden do? He will come and put the workmen to death, and will give the garden into the hands of others.
Have you not seen this which is in the Writings: The stone which the builders put on one side, the same was made the chief stone of the building:
This was the Lord's doing, and it is a wonder in our eyes?
And they made attempts to take him; but they were in fear of the people, because they saw that the story was against them; and they went away from him.
Then they sent to him certain of the Pharisees and the Herodians, so that they might make use of his words to take him by a trick.
And when they had come, they said to him, Master, we are certain that you are true, and have no fear of anyone: you have no respect for a man's position, but you are teaching the true way of God: Is it right to give taxes to Caesar or not?
Are we to give or not to give? But he, conscious of their false hearts, said to them, Why do you put me to the test? give me a penny, so that I may see it.
And they gave him one. And he said to them, Whose is this image and name on it? And they said to him, Caesar's.
And Jesus said to them, Give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the things which are God's. And they were full of wonder at him.
And there came to him Sadducees, who say there is no coming back from the dead; and they put a question to him, saying,
Master, in the law Moses says, If a man's brother comes to his end, and has a wife still living and no child, it is right for his brother to take his wife, and get a family for his brother.
There were seven brothers: and the first took a wife, and at his death there were no offspring;
And the second took her, and at his death there were no offspring; and the third the same:
And all the seven had no seed. Last of all the woman herself came to her death.
In the future life, when they come back from the dead, whose wife will she be? for the seven had her for a wife.
Jesus said to them, Is not this the reason for your error, that you have no knowledge of the holy Writings or of the power of God?
When they come back from the dead, they do not get married, but are like the angels in heaven.
But as to the dead coming back to life; have you not seen in the book of Moses, about the burning thorn-tree, how God said to him, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?
He is not the God of the dead, but of the living: you are greatly in error.
And one of the scribes came, and hearing their argument together, and seeing that he had given them a good answer, put the question to him, Which law is the first of all?
Jesus said in answer, The first is, Give ear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord;
And you are to have love for the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind, and with all your strength.
The second is this, Have love for your neighbour as for yourself. There is no other law greater than these.
And the scribe said to him, Truly, Master, you have well said that he is one, and there is no other but he:
And to have love for him with all the heart, and with all the mind, and with all the strength, and to have the same love for his neighbour as for himself, is much more than all forms of offerings.
And when Jesus saw that he gave a wise answer, he said to him, You are not far from the kingdom of God. And every man after that was in fear of questioning him any more.
And Jesus, when he was teaching in the Temple, said, How do the scribes say that the Christ is the Son of David?
David himself said in the Holy Spirit, The Lord said to my Lord, Be seated at my right hand, till I put those who are against you under your feet.
David himself gives him the name of Lord; and how then is he his son? And the common people gave ear to him gladly.
And in his teaching he said, Be on your watch against the scribes, whose pleasure it is to go about in long robes and be respected in the market-places,
And to have the chief seats in the Synagogues and the first places at feasts;
Who take away the property of widows, and before the eyes of men make long prayers; these will be judged more hardly.
And he took a seat by the place where the money was kept, and saw how the people put money into the boxes: and a number who had wealth put in much.
And there came a poor widow, and she put in two little bits of money, which make a farthing.
And he made his disciples come to him, and said to them, Truly I say to you, This poor widow has put in more than all those who are putting money into the box:
Because they all put in something out of what they had no need for; but she out of her need put in all she had, even all her living.
And when he was going out of the Temple, one of his disciples said to him, Master, see, what stones and what buildings!
And Jesus said to him, Do you see these great buildings? there is not one stone here resting on another which will not be overturned.
And while he was seated on the Mountain of Olives opposite the Temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew said to him privately,
Say when these things will be, and what will be the sign when these things are all about to be done.
And Jesus said to them, Take care that you are not tricked by anyone.
People will come in my name, saying, I am he; and a number will be turned from the true way.
And when you have news of wars and talk of wars, do not be troubled; these things have to be, but it is still not the end.
Nation will go to war with nation, and kingdom with kingdom: there will be earth-shocks in different places; there will be times when there is no food; these things are the first of the troubles.
But take care: for they will give you up to the Sanhedrins; and in Synagogues you will be whipped; and you will be taken before rulers and kings because of me, for a sign to them.
And the good news has first to be given to all the nations.
And when you are taken and given up to be judged, do not be troubled about what to say: but whatever is given to you in that hour, say: because it is not you who say it, but the Holy Spirit.
And brother will give up brother to death, and the father his child; and children will go against their fathers and mothers, and put them to death.
And you will be hated by all men, because of my name; but he who goes through to the end will have salvation.
But when you see the unclean thing which makes destruction, in the place where it has no right to be (let this be clear to the reader), then let those who are in Judaea go quickly to the mountains:
And let him who is on the house-top not go down, or go in, to take anything out of his house:
And let not him who is in the field go back to take his coat.
And it will be hard for women who are with child and for her who has a baby at the breast in those days.
And say a prayer that it may not be in the winter.
For in those days there will be sorrow, such as there has not been from the time when God made the world till now, and will not ever be again.
And if the Lord had not made the time short, no flesh would have been kept from destruction; but because of the saints he has made the time short.
And then if any man says to you, See, here is Christ; or, See, there; have no faith in it:
Because there will be false Christs and false prophets, and they will give signs and wonders in the hope of turning even the saints from the true way.
But take care; see, I have made all things clear to you before the time.
But in those days, after that time of trouble, the sun will be made dark and the moon will not give her light,
And the stars will be falling from heaven, and the powers which are in the heavens will be moved.
And then they will see the Son of man coming in clouds with great power and glory.
And then he will send out the angels, and will get together his saints from the four winds, from the farthest part of the earth to the farthest part of heaven.
Take an example from the fig-tree: when its branches become soft and put out their leaves, you see that the summer is near;
Even so, when you see these things taking place, you may be certain that he is near, even at the doors.
Truly, I say to you, This generation will not come to an end till all these things are complete.
Heaven and earth will come to an end, but my words will not come to an end.
But of that day or that hour no one has knowledge, not even the angels in heaven, or the Son, but the Father.
Take care, keep watch with prayer: for you are not certain when the time will be.
It is as when a man who is in another country for a time, having gone away from his house, and given authority to his servants and to everyone his work, gives the porter an order to keep watch.
So you are to keep watch: because you are not certain when the master of the house is coming, in the evening, or in the middle of the night, or at the cock's cry, or in the morning;
For fear that, coming suddenly, he sees you sleeping.
And what I say to you, I say to all, Keep watch.
It was now two days before the feast of the Passover and the unleavened bread: and the chief priests and the scribes made designs how they might take him by deceit and put him to death:
But they said, Not while the feast is going on, for fear there may be trouble among the people.
And while he was in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, seated at table, there came a woman with a bottle of perfumed oil of great price; and when the bottle was broken she put the perfume on his head.
But some of them were angry among themselves, saying, For what purpose has this oil been wasted?
We might have got more than three hundred pence for it, and given the money to the poor. And they said things against her among themselves.
But Jesus said, Let her be; why are you troubling her? she has done a kind act to me.
The poor you have ever with you, and whenever you have the desire you may do them good: but me you have not for ever.
She has done what she was able: she has put oil on my body to make it ready for its last resting-place.
And truly I say to you, Wherever the good news goes out through all the earth, what this woman has done will be talked of in memory of her.
And Judas Iscariot, who was one of the twelve, went away to the chief priests, so that he might give him up to them.
And hearing what he said, they were glad, and gave him their word to make him a payment of money. And he took thought how he might best give him up to them.
And on the first day of unleavened bread, when the Passover lamb is put to death, his disciples said to him, Where are we to go and make ready for you to take the Passover meal?
And he sent two of his disciples, and said to them, Go into the town, and there will come to you a man with a vessel of water: go after him;
And wherever he goes in, say to the owner of the house, The Master says, Where is my guest-room, where I may take the Passover with my disciples?
And he will take you up himself to a great room with a table and seats: there make ready for us.
And the disciples went out and came into the town, and saw that it was as he had said: and they made ready the Passover.
And when it was evening he came with the twelve.
And while they were seated taking food, Jesus said, Truly I say to you, One of you will be false to me, one who is taking food with me.
They were sad, and said to him one by one, Is it I?
And he said to them, It is one of the twelve, one who is putting his bread with me into the same plate.
The Son of man goes, even as the Writings say of him: but cursed is that man through whom the Son of man is given up! It would have been well for that man if he had never been given birth.
And while they were taking food, he took bread, and after blessing it, he gave the broken bread to them, and said, Take it: this is my body.
And he took a cup, and when he had given praise, he gave it to them: and they all had a drink from it.
And he said to them, This is my blood of the testament, which is given for men.
Truly I say to you, I will take no more of the fruit of the vine till the day when I take it new in the kingdom of God.
And after a song of praise to God they went out to the Mountain of Olives.
And Jesus said to them, You will all be turned away from me: for it is in the Writings, I will put the keeper of the sheep to death, and the sheep will be put to flight.
But after I have come back from the dead, I will go before you into Galilee.
But Peter said to him, Though the others may be turned away from you, I will not.
And Jesus said to him, Truly, I say to you that you, today, even this night, before the cock's second cry, will say three times that you have no knowledge of me.
But he said with passion, If I have to be put to death with you, I will not be false to you. And they all said the same.
And they came to a place which was named Gethsemane: and he said to his disciples, Be seated here while I say a prayer.
And he took with him Peter and James and John, and grief and great trouble came on him.
And he said to them, My soul is very sad, even to death: be here a little time, and keep watch.
And he went forward a little, and falling down on the earth, made request that, if possible, the hour might go from him.
And he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible to you; take away this cup from me: but even so let not my pleasure, but yours be done.
And he came, and saw them sleeping, and said to Peter, Simon, are you sleeping? were you not able to keep watch one hour?
Keep watch with prayer, so that you may not be put to the test; the spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is feeble.
And again he went away, and said a prayer, using the same words.
And again he came and saw them sleeping, because their eyes were very tired; and they had nothing to say in answer.
And he came the third time, and said to them, Go on sleeping now and take your rest: it is enough; the hour has come; see, the Son of man is given up into the hands of evil men.
Get up, let us be going; see, he who gives me up is near.
And straight away, while he was still talking, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great band with swords and sticks, from the chief priests and the scribes and those in authority.
Now he who had been false to him had given them a sign, saying, The one to whom I give a kiss, that is he; take him, and get him away safely.
And when he had come, he went straight to him and said, Master; and gave him a kiss.
And they put their hands on him, and took him.
But a certain one of those who were near took out his sword, and gave the servant of the high priest a blow, cutting off his ear.
And Jesus said to them, Have you come out as against a thief, with swords and sticks to take me?
I was with you every day in the Temple teaching, and you did not take me; but this is done so that the Writings may come true.
And they all went away from him in fear.
And a certain young man went after him, with only a linen cloth about his body; and they put their hands on him;
But he got away unclothed, without the linen cloth.
And they took Jesus away to the high priest; and there came together with him all the chief priests and those in authority and the scribes.
And Peter had come after him at a distance, even into the house of the high priest; and he was seated with the captains, warming himself in the light of the fire.
Now the chief priests and all the Sanhedrin were looking for witness against Jesus so that they might put him to death; and they were unable to get any.
For a number gave false witness against him and their witness was not in agreement.
Then some got up and gave false witness against him, saying,
He said in our hearing, I will put an end to this Temple which is made with hands, and in three days I will make another without hands.
And even so their witness was not in agreement.
And the high priest got up in the middle of them, and said to Jesus, Do you say nothing in answer? what is it which these say against you?
But he kept quiet and said nothing. Again the high priest questioning him said, Are you the Christ, the son of the Holy One?
And Jesus said, I am: and you will see the Son of man seated at the right hand of power, and coming with the clouds of heaven.
And the high priest, violently parting his robes, said, What more need have we of witnesses?
His words against God have come to your ears: what is your opinion? And they all said it was right for him to be put to death.
And some put shame on him and, covering his face, gave him blows and said to him, Now say what is to come: and the captains took him and gave him blows with their hands.
And while Peter was down in the open square of the building, one of the servant-girls of the high priest came;
And seeing Peter warming himself by the fire, she gave him a look, and said, You were with this Nazarene, even Jesus.
But he said, I have no knowledge of him, or of what you are saying: and he went out into the doorway; and there came the cry of a cock.
And the girl saw him, and said again to those who were near, This is one of them.
But again he said it was not so. And after a little time, again those who were near said to Peter, Truly you are one of them; for you are a Galilaean.
But, with curses and oaths, he said, I have no knowledge of the man about whom you are talking.
And in the same minute, the cock gave a second cry. And it came to Peter's mind how Jesus had said to him, Before the cock's second cry, you will say three times that you have no knowledge of me. And at this thought he was overcome with weeping.
And the first thing in the morning the chief priests, with those in authority and the scribes and all the Sanhedrin, had a meeting, and put cords round Jesus, and took him away, and gave him up to Pilate.
And Pilate put a question to him, Are you the King of the Jews? And he, answering, said to him, You say so.
And the chief priests said a number of things against him.
And Pilate again put a question, Do you say nothing in answer? see how much evil they say you have done.
But Jesus gave no more answers, so that Pilate was full of wonder.
Now at the feast every year he let one prisoner go free at their request.
And there was one named Barabbas, in prison with those who had gone against the government and in the fight had taken life.
And the people went up, requesting him to do as he had done for them in other years.
And Pilate said in answer to them, Is it your desire that I let the King of the Jews go free?
For he saw that the chief priests had given him up through envy.
But the people were moved by the chief priests to make him let Barabbas go free.
And Pilate again said in answer to them, What then am I to do to him to whom you give the name of the King of the Jews?
And they said again loudly, To the cross with him!
And Pilate said to them, Why, what evil has he done? But their cry was the louder, To the cross!
And Pilate, desiring to do what was pleasing to the people, let Barabbas go free, and gave up Jesus, when he had been whipped, to be put to death on the cross.
And the men of the army took him away into the square in front of the building which is the Praetorium, and they got together all the band.
And they put a purple robe on him, and twisting a crown of thorns, they put it on him;
And, as if honouring him, they said, Long life to the King of the Jews!
And they gave him blows on the head with a stick and put shame on him and, going down on their knees, gave him worship.
And when they had made sport of him, they took the purple robe off him and put his clothing on him. And they took him out to put him to death on the cross.
And they made one, Simon of Cyrene, the father of Alexander and Rufus, who was going by, coming from the country, go with them, so that he might take his cross.
And they took him to the place named Golgotha, which is, Dead Man's Head.
And they gave him wine mixed with myrrh; but he did not take it.
And he was nailed to the cross; and they made a division of his clothing among them, putting to the decision of chance what everyone was to take.
And it was the third hour when they put him on the cross.
And the statement of his crime was put in writing on the cross, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
And they put two thieves on crosses with him, one on his right side, and one on his left.
[]
And those who went by made sport of him, shaking their heads, and saying, Ha! you who give the Temple to destruction, and put it up again in three days,
Keep yourself from death, and come down from the cross.
In the same way the chief priests, laughing at him among themselves with the scribes, said, A saviour of others, he has no salvation for himself.
Let the Christ, the King of Israel, come down now from the cross, so that we may see and have belief. And those who were put on crosses with him said evil things against him.
And when the sixth hour had come, it was dark over all the land till the ninth hour.
And at the ninth hour, Jesus said in a loud voice, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, My God, my God, why are you turned away from me?
And some of those who were near, hearing it, said, See, he is crying to Elijah.
And one of them went quickly and, getting a sponge full of bitter wine, put it on a rod, and gave it to him for drink, saying, Let be; let us see if Elijah will come to take him down.
And Jesus gave a loud cry, and gave up his spirit.
And the curtain of the Temple was parted in two from end to end.
And when the captain, who was near, saw how he gave up his spirit, he said, Truly this man was a son of God.
And there were women watching from a distance: among them were Mary Magdalene, and Mary, the mother of James the less and of Joses, and Salome,
Who went with him when he was in Galilee and took care of him; and a number of other women who came up with him to Jerusalem.
And when it was evening, because it was the time of getting ready, that is, the day before the Sabbath,
There came Joseph of Arimathaea, a responsible man in high honour, who was himself waiting for the kingdom of God; and he went in to Pilate without fear, and made a request for the body of Jesus.
And Pilate was surprised that he was dead; and, sending for the captain, he put a question to see if he had been dead for long.
And when he had news of it from the captain, he let Joseph have the body.
And he got a linen cloth and, taking him down, put the linen cloth round him, and put him in a place for the dead which had been cut out of a rock; and a stone was rolled against the door.
And Mary Magdalene and Mary, the mother of Joses, saw where he was put.
And when the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene and Mary, the mother of James, and Salome, got spices, so that they might come and put them on him.
And very early after dawn on the first day of the week, they came at the time of the coming up of the sun to the place where the body had been put.
And they were saying among themselves, Who will get the stone rolled away from the door for us?
And looking up, they saw that the stone was rolled back; and it was of great size.
And when they went in, they saw a young man seated on the right side, dressed in a white robe; and they were full of wonder.
And he said to them, Do not be troubled: you are looking for Jesus, the Nazarene, who has been put to death on the cross; he has come back from the dead; he is not here: see, the place where they put him!
But go, say to his disciples and to Peter, He goes before you into Galilee: there you will see him, as he said to you.
And they went out quickly from the place, because fear and great wonder had come on them: and they said nothing to anyone, because they were full of fear that ...
Now when he came back from the dead early on the first day of the week, he went first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had sent out seven evil spirits.
She went and gave news of it to those who had been with him, while they were sorrowing and weeping.
And they, when it came to their ears that he was living, and had been seen by her, had no belief in it.
And after these things he was seen in another form by two of them, while they were walking on their way into the country.
And they went away and gave news of it to the rest; and they had no belief in what was said.
And later he was seen by the eleven themselves while they were taking food; and he said sharp words to them because they had no faith and their hearts were hard, and because they had no belief in those who had seen him after he had come back from the dead.
And he said to them, Go into all the world, and give the good news to everyone.
He who has faith and is given baptism will get salvation; but he who has not faith will be judged.
And these signs will be with those who have faith: in my name they will send out evil spirits; and they will make use of new languages;
They will take up snakes, and if there is poison in their drink, it will do them no evil; they will put their hands on those who are ill, and they will get well.
So then the Lord Jesus, after he had said these words to them, was taken up into heaven and took his seat at the right hand of God.
And they went out, preaching everywhere, the Lord working with them, and giving witness to the word by the signs which came after. So be it.
And when he came into Capernaum again after some days, the news went about that he was in the house.
And a great number had come together, so that there was no longer room for them, no, not even about the door: and he gave them teaching.
And four men came to him with one on a bed who had no power of moving.
And when they were unable to get near him because of all the people, they got the roof uncovered where he was: and when it was broken up, they let down the bed on which the man was.
And Jesus, seeing their faith, said to him, Son, you have forgiveness for your sins.
But there were certain of the scribes seated there, and reasoning in their hearts,
Why does this man say such things? he has no respect for God: from whom does forgiveness come but from God only?
And Jesus, having knowledge in his spirit of their thoughts, said to them, Why are you reasoning about these things in your hearts?
Which is the simpler, to say to a man who is ill, You have forgiveness for your sins, or, Get up, take up your bed, and go?
But so that you may see that the Son of man has authority for the forgiveness of sins on earth, (he said to the man,)
I say to you, Get up, take up your bed, and go to your house.
And he got up, and straight away took up the bed and went out before them all, so that they were all full of wonder, and gave glory to God, saying, We have never seen anything like this.
And he went out again by the seaside; and all the people came to him, and he gave them teaching.
And when he went by, he saw Levi, the son of Alphaeus, seated at the place where taxes were taken, and he said to him, Come with me. And he got up, and went with him.
And it came about that he was seated at meat in his house, and a number of tax-farmers and sinners were at table with Jesus and his disciples: for there were a great number of them, and they came after him.
And the scribes of the Pharisees, when they saw that he was taking food with the tax-farmers and sinners, said to his disciples, Why does he take food and drink with such men?
And Jesus, hearing it, said to them, Those who are well have no need of a medical man, but those who are ill: I have come not to get the upright but sinners.
And John's disciples and the Pharisees were taking no food: and they came and said to him, Why do John's disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees go without food, but your disciples do not?
And Jesus said to them, Will the friends of a newly-married man go without food while he is with them? as long as they have him with them they will not go without food.
But the days will come when the husband will be taken away from them, and then they will go without food.
No man puts a bit of new cloth on an old coat: or the new, by pulling away from the old, makes a worse hole.
And no man puts new wine into old wine-skins: or the skins will be burst by the wine, and the wine and the skins will be wasted: but new wine has to be put into new wine-skins.
And it came about that on the Sabbath day he was going through the grain-fields; and while they were walking, his disciples took the heads of grain.
And the Pharisees said to him, Why are they doing what it is not right to do on the Sabbath?
And he said to them, Have you no knowledge of what David did, when he had need and was without food, he, and those who were with him?
How he went into the house of God when Abiathar was high priest, and took for food the holy bread, which only the priests may take, and gave it to those who were with him?
And he said to them, The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath;
So that the Son of man is lord even of the Sabbath.
And he went again into the Synagogue; and there was a man there whose hand was dead.
And they were watching him to see if he would make him well on the Sabbath day, so that they might have something against him.
And he said to the man, Get up and come forward.
And he said to them, Is it right to do good on the Sabbath or to do evil? to give life or to put to death? But they said nothing.
And looking round on them he was angry, being sad because of their hard hearts; and he said to the man, Put out your hand. And he put it out, and his hand was made well.
And the Pharisees went out, and straight away made designs with the Herodians about how they might put him to death.
And Jesus went away with his disciples to the sea, and a great number from Galilee came after him: and from Judaea,
And from Jerusalem, and from Idumaea, and the other side of Jordan, and the country about Tyre and Sidon, a great number, hearing what great things he did, came to him.
And he made a request to his disciples to have a little boat ready for him, so that he might not be crushed by the people;
For he had made such a great number well that all those who were diseased were falling down before him for the purpose of touching him.
And the unclean spirits, whenever they saw him, went down before him, crying out, and saying, You are the Son of God.
And he gave them special orders not to say who he was.
And he went up into the mountain, and sent for those whom it was his pleasure to have with him: and they went to him.
And he took twelve to be with him, so that he might send them out as preachers,
And give them the power of driving out evil spirits:
To Simon he gave the second name of Peter;
And to James, the son of Zebedee, and John, the brother of James, he gave the second name of Boanerges, which is, Sons of thunder:
And Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James, the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus, and Simon the Zealot;
And Judas Iscariot, who was false to him.
And he went into a house. And the people came together again, so that they were not even able to take bread.
And when his friends had news of it, they went out to get him, saying, He is off his head.
And the scribes who came down from Jerusalem, said, He has Beelzebub, and, By the ruler of evil spirits he sends evil spirits out of men.
And turning to them, he said to them in the form of a story, How is it possible for Satan to put out Satan?
If there is division in a kingdom, that kingdom will come to destruction;
And if there is division in a house, that house will come to destruction;
And if Satan is at war with himself, and there is division in him, he will not keep his place but will come to an end.
But no one is able to go into the house of the strong man and take his goods, without first putting cords round the strong man, and then he will take his goods.
Truly, I say to you, The sons of men will have forgiveness for all their sins and for all the evil words they say:
But whoever says evil things against the Holy Spirit will never have forgiveness, but the evil he has done will be with him for ever:
Because they said, He has an unclean spirit.
And his mother and brothers came and were outside, and sent for him, requesting to see him.
And a great number were seated round him; and they said to him, See, your mother and your brothers are outside looking for you.
And he said in answer, Who are my mother and my brothers?
And looking round at those who were seated about him, he said, See, my mother and my brothers!
Whoever does God's pleasure, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.
And again he was teaching by the seaside. And a very great number of people had come to him, so that he got into a boat on the sea and took his seat; and all the people were on the land by the seaside.
And he gave them teaching about a number of things in the form of stories, and said to them in his teaching, Give ear:
A man went out to put seed in the earth:
And while he was doing it, some was dropped by the wayside, and the birds came and took it for food.
And some went on the stones, where it had not much earth; and it came up straight away, because the earth was not deep:
And when the sun was high, it was burned; and because it had no root, it became dry and dead.
And some went among the thorns, and the thorns came up, and it had no room for growth and gave no fruit.
And some, falling on good earth, gave fruit, coming up and increasing, and giving thirty, sixty, and a hundred times as much.
And he said to them, Whoever has ears, let him give ear.
And when he was by himself, those who were round him with the twelve put questions to him about the purpose of the stories.
And he said to them, To you is given the secret of the kingdom of God, but to those who are outside, all things are given in the form of stories;
So that seeing they may see, and it will not be clear to them; and hearing it, they will not get the sense; for fear that they may be turned again to me and have forgiveness.
And he said to them, If you are not clear about this story, how will you be clear about the others?
The seed is the word.
And these are they by the wayside, where the word is planted; and when they have given ear, the Evil One comes straight away and takes away the word which has been planted in them.
And in the same way, these are they who are planted on the stones, who, when the word has come to their ears, straight away take it with joy;
And they have no root in themselves, but go on for a time; then, when trouble comes or pain, because of the word, they quickly become full of doubts.
And others are those planted among the thorns; these are they who have given ear to the word,
And the cares of this life, and the deceits of wealth, and the desire for other things coming in, put a stop to the growth of the word, and it gives no fruit.
And these are they who were planted on the good earth; such as give ear to the word, and take it into their hearts, and give fruit, thirty and sixty and a hundred times as much.
And he said to them, When the light comes in, do people put it under a vessel, or under the bed, and not on its table?
There is nothing covered which will not be seen openly, and nothing has been made secret which will not come to light.
If any man has ears, let him give ear.
And he said to them, Take care what you give ear to: in the same measure as you give you will get, and more will be given to you.
He who has, to him will be given: and he who has not, from him will be taken even that which he has.
And he said, Such is the kingdom of God, as if a man put seed in the earth,
And went to sleep and got up, night and day, and the seed came to growth, though he had no idea how.
The earth gives fruit by herself; first the leaf, then the head, then the full grain.
But when the grain is ready, he quickly sends men to get it cut, because the time for cutting has come.
And he said, What picture may we give of the kingdom of God, or with what story may we make it clear?
It is like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is put in the earth, is smaller than all the seeds on the earth,
But when it is planted, it comes up, and becomes taller than all the plants, and puts out great branches, so that the birds of heaven are able to take rest in its shade.
And with a number of such stories he gave them his teaching, as they were able to take it:
And without a story he said nothing to them: but privately to his disciples he made all things clear.
And on that day, when the evening had come, he said to them, Let us go over to the other side.
And going away from the people, they took him with them, as he was, in the boat. And other boats were with him.
And a great storm of wind came up, and the waves came into the boat, so that the boat was now becoming full.
And he himself was in the back of the boat, sleeping on the cushion: and they, awaking him, said, Master, is it nothing to you that we are in danger of destruction?
And he came out of his sleep, and gave strong orders to the wind, and said to the sea, Peace, be at rest. And the wind went down, and there was a great calm.
And he said to them, Why are you full of fear? have you still no faith?
And their fear was great, and they said one to another, Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea do his orders?
And they came to the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gerasenes.
And when he had got out of the boat, straight away there came to him from the place of the dead a man with an unclean spirit.
He was living in the place of the dead: and no man was able to keep him down, no, not with a chain;
Because he had frequently been prisoned in chains and iron bands, and the chains had been parted and the bands broken by him: and no man was strong enough to make him quiet.
And all the time, by day and by night, in the place of the dead, and in the mountains, he was crying out and cutting himself with stones.
And when he saw Jesus from far off, he went quickly to him and gave him worship;
And crying out with a loud voice he said, What have I to do with you, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? In God's name, do not be cruel to me.
For Jesus had said to him, Come out of the man, you unclean spirit.
And Jesus said, What is your name? And he made answer, My name is Legion, because there are a great number of us.
And he made strong prayers to him not to send them away out of the country.
Now on the mountain side there was a great herd of pigs getting their food.
And they said to him, Send us into the pigs, so that we may go into them.
And he let them do it. And the unclean spirits came out and went into the pigs; and the herd went rushing down a sharp slope into the sea, about two thousand of them; and they came to their death in the sea.
And their keepers went running and gave an account of it in the town and in the country. And people came to see what had taken place.
And they came to Jesus, and saw the man in whom had been the evil spirits seated, clothed and with full use of his senses, and they were full of fear.
And those who had seen it gave them an account of what had been done to him who had the evil spirits, and of the fate of the pigs.
And they made a request to him to go out of their country.
And when he was getting into the boat, the man in whom had been the evil spirits had a great desire to come with him.
And he would not let him, but said to him, Go to your house, to your friends, and give them news of the great things the Lord has done for you, and how he had mercy on you.
And he went on his way, and made public in the country of Decapolis what great things Jesus had done for him: and all men were full of wonder.
And when Jesus had gone over again in the boat to the other side, a great number of people came to him: and he was by the sea.
And one of the rulers of the Synagogue, Jairus by name, came, and seeing him, went down at his feet,
And made strong prayers to him, saying, My little daughter is near to death: it is my prayer that you will come and put your hands on her, so that she may be made well, and have life.
And he went with him; and a great number of people went after him, and came round him.
And a woman, who had had a flow of blood for twelve years,
And had undergone much at the hands of a number of medical men, and had given all she had, and was no better, but even worse,
When she had news of the things which Jesus did, went among the people coming after him, and put her hand on his robe.
For she said, If I may only put my hand on his robe, I will be made well.
And straight away the fountain of her blood was stopped, and she had a feeling in her body that her disease had gone and she was well.
And straight away Jesus was conscious that power had gone out of him; and, turning to the people, he said, Who was touching my robe?
And his disciples said to him, You see the people round you on every side, and you say, Who was touching me?
And on his looking round to see her who had done this thing,
The woman, shaking with fear, conscious of what had been done to her, came and, falling on her face before him, gave him a true account of everything.
And he said to her, Daughter, your faith has made you well; go in peace, and be free from your disease.
And while he was still talking, they came from the ruler of the Synagogue's house, saying, Your daughter is dead: why are you still troubling the Master?
But Jesus, giving no attention to their words, said to the ruler of the Synagogue, Have no fear, only have faith.
And he did not let anyone come with him, but Peter and James and John, the brother of James.
And they came to the house of the ruler of the Synagogue; and he saw people running this way and that, and weeping and crying loudly.
And when he had gone in, he said to them, Why are you making such a noise and weeping? The child is not dead, but sleeping.
And they were laughing at him. But he, having sent them all out, took the father of the child and her mother and those who were with him, and went in where the child was.
And taking her by the hand, he said to her, Talitha cumi, which is, My child, I say to you, Get up.
And the young girl got up straight away, and was walking about; she being twelve years old. And they were overcome with wonder.
And he gave them special orders that they were not to say anything of this; and he said that some food was to be given to her.
And he went away from there, and came into his country; and his disciples went with him.
And when the Sabbath day had come, he was teaching in the Synagogue; and a number of people hearing him were surprised, saying, From where did this man get these things? and, What is the wisdom given to this man, and what are these works of power done by his hands?
Is not this the woodworker, the son of Mary, and brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us? And they were bitter against him.
And Jesus said to them, A prophet is nowhere without honour, but in his country, and among his relations, and in his family.
And he was unable to do any work of power there, but only to put his hands on one or two persons who were ill, and make them well.
And he was greatly surprised because they had no faith. And he went about the country places teaching.
And he gave orders to the twelve, and sent them out two by two; and he gave them authority over the unclean spirits;
And he said that they were to take nothing for their journey, but a stick only; no bread, no bag, no money in their pockets;
They were to go with common shoes on their feet, and not to take two coats.
And he said to them, Wherever you go into a house, make that your resting-place till you go away.
And whatever place will not take you in and will not give ear to you, when you go away, put off the dust from your feet as a witness against them.
And they went out, preaching the need for a change of heart in men.
And they sent out a number of evil spirits, and put oil on a great number who were ill, and made them well.
And king Herod had news of him, because his name was on the lips of all; and he said, John the Baptist has come back from the dead, and for this reason these powers are working in him.
But others said, It is Elijah. And others said, It is a prophet, even like one of the prophets.
But Herod, when he had news of it, said, John, whom I put to death, has come back from the dead.
For Herod himself had sent men out to take John and put him in prison, because of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife, whom he had taken for himself.
For John said to Herod, It is wrong for you to have your brother's wife.
And Herodias was bitter against him, desiring to put him to death; but she was not able;
For Herod was in fear of John, being conscious that he was an upright and holy man, and kept him safe. And hearing him, he was much troubled; and he gave ear to him gladly.
And the chance came when Herod on his birthday gave a feast to his lords, and the high captains, and the chief men of Galilee;
And when the daughter of Herodias herself came in and did a dance, Herod and those who were at table with him were pleased with her; and the king said to the girl, Make a request for anything and I will give it you.
And he took an oath, saying to her, Whatever is your desire I will give it to you, even half of my kingdom.
And she went out and said to her mother, What is my request to be? And she said, The head of John the Baptist.
And she came in quickly to the king, and said, My desire is that you give me straight away on a plate the head of John the Baptist.
And the king was very sad; but because of his oaths, and those who were with him at table, he would not say 'No' to her.
And straight away the king sent out one of his armed men, and gave him an order to come back with the head: and he went and took off John's head in prison,
And came back with the head on a plate, and gave it to the girl; and the girl gave it to her mother.
And when his disciples had news of it, they came and took up his body, and put it in its last resting-place.
And the twelve came together to Jesus; and they gave him an account of all the things they had done, and all they had been teaching.
And he said to them, Come away by yourselves to a quiet place, and take a rest for a time. Because there were a great number coming and going, and they had no time even for food.
And they went away in the boat to a waste place by themselves.
And the people saw them going, and a number of them, having knowledge who they were, went running there together on foot from all the towns, and got there before them.
And he got out, and saw a great mass of people, and he had pity on them, because they were like sheep without a keeper: and he gave them teaching about a number of things.
And at the end of the day, his disciples came to him and said, This place is waste land, and it is late:
Send them away, so that they may go into the country and small towns round about, and get some food for themselves.
But he said to them in answer, Give them food yourselves. And they said to him, Are we to go and get bread for two hundred pence, and give it to them?
And he said to them, How much bread have you? go and see. And when they had seen, they said, Five cakes of bread and two fishes.
And he made them all be seated in groups on the green grass.
And they were placed in groups, by hundreds and by fifties.
And he took the five cakes of bread and the two fishes and, looking up to heaven, he said words of blessing over them; and when the cakes were broken, he gave them to the disciples to put before the people; and he made division of the two fishes among them all.
And they all took of the food and had enough.
And they took up twelve baskets full of the broken bits and of the fishes.
And those who took of the bread were five thousand men.
And straight away he made his disciples get into the boat, and go before him to the other side to Beth-saida, while he himself sent the people away.
And after he had sent them away, he went up into a mountain for prayer.
And by evening, the boat was in the middle of the sea, and he by himself on the land.
And seeing that they had trouble in getting their boat through the water, because the wind was against them, about the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea; and he would have gone past them;
But they, when they saw him walking on the sea, took him for a spirit, and gave a loud cry:
For they all saw him, and were troubled. But straight away he said to them, Take heart, it is I, have no fear.
And he went to them into the boat, and the wind went down, and they were full of wonder in themselves;
For it was not clear to them about the bread; but their hearts were hard.
And when they had gone across, they came to Gennesaret, and got their boat to land.
And when they had got out of the boat, the people quickly had news of him,
And went running through all the country round about, and took on their beds those who were ill, to where it was said that he was.
And wherever he went, into small towns, or great towns, or into the country, they took those who were ill into the market-places, requesting him that they might put their hands even on the edge of his robe: and all those who did so were made well.
And there came together to him the Pharisees and certain of the scribes who had come from Jerusalem,
And had seen that some of his disciples took their bread with unclean, that is, unwashed, hands.
Now the Pharisees, and all the Jews, do not take food without washing their hands with care, keeping the old rule which has been handed down to them:
And when they come from the market-place, they take no food till their hands are washed; and a number of other orders there are, which have been handed down to them to keep--washings of cups and pots and brass vessels.
And the Pharisees and the scribes put the question to him, Why do your disciples not keep the rules of the fathers, but take their bread with unwashed hands?
And he said, Well did Isaiah say of you, you false ones: These people give me honour with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
But their worship is to no purpose, while they give as their teaching the rules of men.
For, turning away from the law of God, you keep the rules of men.
And he said to them, Truly you put on one side the law of God, so that you may keep the rules which have been handed down to you.
For Moses said, Give honour to your father and mother, and, He who says evil of father or mother, let him have the punishment of death:
But you say, If a man says to his father or his mother, That by which you might have had profit from me is Corban, that is to say, Given to God,
You no longer let him do anything for his father or his mother;
Making the word of God of no effect by your rule, which you have given: and a number of other such things you do.
And turning to the people again, he said to them, Give ear to me all of you, and let my words be clear to you:
There is nothing outside the man which, going into him, is able to make him unclean: but the things which come out of the man are those which make the man unclean.
[]
And when he had gone into the house away from all the people, his disciples put questions to him about the saying.
And he said to them, Have even you so little wisdom? Do you not see that whatever goes into a man from outside is not able to make him unclean,
Because it goes not into the heart but into the stomach, and goes out with the waste? He said this, making all food clean.
And he said, That which comes out of the man, that makes the man unclean.
Because from inside, from the heart of men, come evil thoughts and unclean pleasures,
The taking of goods and of life, broken faith between husband and wife, the desire of wealth, wrongdoing, deceit, sins of the flesh, an evil eye, angry words, pride, foolish acts:
All these evil things come from inside, and make the man unclean.
And he went away from there to the country of Tyre and Sidon. And he went into a house, desiring that no man might have knowledge of it: and he was not able to keep it secret.
But a woman, whose little daughter had an unclean spirit, having had news of him, came straight away and went down at his feet.
Now the woman was a Greek, a Syro-phoenician by birth: and she made a request to him that he would send the evil spirit out of her daughter.
And he said to her, Let the children first have their food: for it is not right to take the children's bread and give it to the dogs.
But she said to him in answer, Yes, Lord: even the dogs under the table take the bits dropped by the children.
And he said to her, For this saying go your way; the evil spirit has gone out of your daughter.
And she went away to her house, and saw the child on the bed, and the evil spirit gone out.
And again he went out from Tyre, and came through Sidon to the sea of Galilee, through the country of Decapolis.
And they came to him with one who had no power of hearing and had trouble in talking; and they made a request to him to put his hands on him.
And he took him on one side from the people privately, and put his fingers into his ears, and he put water from his mouth on the man's tongue with his finger;
And looking up to heaven, he took a deep breath, and said to him, Ephphatha, that is, Be open.
And his ears became open, and the band of his tongue was made loose, and his words became clear.
And he gave them orders not to give news of it to anyone; but the more he made this request, so much the more they made it public.
And they were overcome with wonder, saying, He has done all things well: he even gives back the power of hearing and the power of talking to those who have been without them.
In those days again, when there was a great mass of people and they had no food, he made his disciples come to him and said to them,
I have pity for these people because they have been with me now three days, and have no food;
If I send them away to their houses with no food, they will be overcome by weariness on the way; and some of them have come from far.
And his disciples said in answer, How will it be possible to get enough bread for these men here in a waste place?
And he put the question, How much bread have you? And they said, Seven cakes.
And he made the people be seated on the earth: and he took the seven cakes and, having given praise, he gave the broken bread to his disciples to put before them; and they put it before the people.
And they had some small fishes; and blessing them he had them put before the people in the same way.
And they took the food, and had enough; and they took up seven baskets full of the broken bits.
And there were about four thousand people: and he sent them away.
And he got into the boat with his disciples straight away, and came into the country of Dalmanutha.
And the Pharisees came out and put questions to him, requesting from him a sign from heaven, testing him.
And he was very sad in spirit, and said, Why is this generation looking for a sign? truly, I say to you, No sign will be given to this generation.
And he went away from them, and again got into the boat and went across to the other side.
And they had taken no thought to get bread; and they had only one cake of bread with them in the boat.
And he said to them, Take care to be on the watch against the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.
And they said to one another, We have no bread.
And Jesus, hearing it, said to them, Why are you reasoning among yourselves because you have no bread? do you still not see, and is it still not clear to you? are your hearts so hard?
Having eyes, do you not see? and having ears, have you no hearing? and have you no memory?
When I made a division of the five cakes of bread among the five thousand, what number of baskets full of broken bits did you take up? They said to him, Twelve.
And when the seven among the four thousand, what number of baskets full of broken bits did you take up? And they said to him, Seven.
And he said to them, Is it still not clear to you?
And they came to Beth-saida. And they took a blind man to him, requesting him to put his hands on him.
And he took the blind man by the hand, and went with him out of the town; and when he had put water from his mouth on his eyes, and put his hands on him, he said, Do you see anything?
And looking up, he said, I see men; I see them like trees, walking.
Then again he put his hands on his eyes; and looking hard, he was able to see, and saw all things clearly.
And he sent him away to his house, saying, Do not even go into the town.
And Jesus went out, with his disciples, into the little towns round Caesarea Philippi; and on the way he put a question to his disciples, saying, Who do men say that I am?
And they made answer, John the Baptist; and others, Elijah; but others, One of the prophets.
And he said to them, But who do you say I am? Peter said in answer, You are the Christ.
And he put them under orders not to say this of him to anyone.
And teaching them, he said that the Son of man would have to undergo much, and be hated by those in authority, and the chief priests, and the scribes, and be put to death, and after three days come back from the dead.
And he said this openly. And Peter took him, and was protesting.
But he, turning about, and seeing his disciples, said sharply to Peter, Get out of my way, Satan: for your mind is not on the things of God, but on the things of men.
And turning to the mass of people with his disciples, he said to them, If any man has the desire to come after me, let him give up all other desires, and take up his cross and come after me.
Whoever has a desire to keep his life, will have it taken from him; and whoever gives up his life because of me and the good news, will keep it.
What profit has a man if he gets all the world with the loss of his life?
And what would a man give in exchange for his life?
Whoever has a feeling of shame because of me and my words in this false and evil generation, the Son of man will have a feeling of shame because of him, when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.
And he said to them, Truly I say to you, There are some here who will have no taste of death till they see the kingdom of God come with power.
And after six days Jesus took with him Peter and James and John, and made them go up with him into a high mountain by themselves: and he was changed in form before them:
And his clothing became shining, very white, as no cleaner on earth would make it.
And there came before them Elijah with Moses, and they were talking with Jesus.
And Peter said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three tents; one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.
Because he was not certain what to say, for they were in great fear.
And a cloud came over them; and a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is my dearly loved Son, give ear to him.
And suddenly looking round about, they saw no one any longer, but Jesus only with themselves.
And while they were coming down from the mountain, he gave them orders not to give word to any man of the things they had seen, till the Son of man had come back from the dead.
And they kept the saying, questioning among themselves what the coming back from the dead might be.
And they put a question to him, saying, Why do the scribes say that Elijah has to come first?
And he said to them, Truly, Elijah does come first, and puts all things in order; and how is it said in the Writings that the Son of man will go through much sorrow and be made as nothing?
But I say to you that Elijah has come, and they have done to him whatever they were pleased to do, even as the Writings say about him.
And when they came to the disciples, they saw a great mass of people about them, and scribes questioning them.
And straight away all the people, when they saw him, were full of wonder, and running to him, gave him worship.
And he said, What are you questioning them about?
And one of the number said to him in answer, Master, I came to you with my son, who has in him a spirit which takes away his power of talking;
And wherever it takes him, it puts him down violently, streaming at the lips and twisted with pain; and his strength goes from him; and I made a request to your disciples to send it out, and they were not able.
And he said to them in answer, O generation without faith, how long will I have to be with you? how long will I put up with you? let him come to me.
And they took him to him: and when he saw him, the spirit in him straight away became violent; and he went down on the earth, rolling about and streaming at the lips.
And Jesus questioning the father said, How long has he been like this? And he said, From a child.
And frequently it has sent him into the fire and into the water, for his destruction; but if you are able to do anything, have pity on us, and give us help.
And Jesus said to him, If you are able! All things are possible to him who has faith.
Straight away the father of the child gave a cry, saying, I have faith; make my feeble faith stronger.
And when Jesus saw that the people came running together, he gave orders to the unclean spirit, saying to him, You, spirit, who are the cause of his loss of voice and hearing, I say to you, come out of him, and never again go into him.
And after crying out and shaking him violently, it came out: and the child became like one dead; so that most of them said, He is dead.
But Jesus took him by the hand, lifting him up; and he got up.
And when he had gone into the house, his disciples said to him privately, Why were we unable to send it out?
And he said to them, Nothing will make this sort come out but prayer.
And they went out from there, through Galilee; and it was his desire that no man might have knowledge of it;
For he was giving his disciples teaching, and saying to them, The Son of man is given up into the hands of men, and they will put him to death; and when he is dead, after three days he will come back from the dead.
But the saying was not clear to them, and they were in fear of questioning him about it.
And they came to Capernaum: and when he was in the house, he put the question to them, What were you talking about on the way?
But they said nothing: because they had had an argument between themselves on the way, about who was the greatest.
And seating himself, he made the twelve come to him; and he said to them, If any man has the desire to be first, he will be last of all and servant of all.
And he took a little child, and put him in the middle of them; and taking him in his arms, he said to them,
Whoever will give honour to one such little child in my name, gives honour to me: and whoever gives honour to me, gives honour not to me, but to him who sent me.
John said to him, Master, we saw one driving out evil spirits in your name: and we said that he might not, because he is not one of us.
But Jesus said, Say not so: for there is no man who will do a great work in my name, and be able at the same time to say evil of me.
He who is not against us is for us.
Whoever gives you a cup of water, because you are Christ's, truly I say to you, he will in no way be without his reward.
And whoever is a cause of trouble to one of these little ones who have faith in me, it would be better for him if a great stone was put round his neck and he was dropped into the sea.
And if your hand is a cause of trouble to you, let it be cut off; it is better for you to go into life with one hand than to have two hands and go into hell, into the eternal fire.
[]
And if your foot is a cause of trouble to you, let it be cut off: it is better for you to go into life with one foot than to have two feet and go into hell.
[]
And if your eye is a cause of trouble to you, take it out: it is better for you to go into the kingdom of God with one eye than, having two eyes, to go into hell,
Where their worm is ever living and the fire is not put out.
Everyone will be salted with fire.
Salt is good; but if the taste goes from it, how will you make it salt again? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace one with another.
As a number of attempts have been made to put together in order an account of those events which took place among us,
As they were handed down to us by those who saw them from the first and were preachers of the word,
It seemed good to me, having made observation, with great care, of the direction of events in their order, to put the facts in writing for you, most noble Theophilus;
So that you might have certain knowledge of those things about which you were given teaching.
In the days of Herod, king of Judaea, there was a certain priest, by name Zacharias, of the order of Abijah; and he had a wife of the family of Aaron, and her name was Elisabeth.
They were upright in the eyes of God, keeping all the rules and orders of God, and doing no wrong.
And they were without children, because Elisabeth had never given birth, and they were at that time very old.
Now it came about that in his turn he was acting as priest before God,
And as was the way of the priests, he had to go into the Temple to see to the burning of perfumes.
And all the people were offering prayers outside, at the time of the burning of perfumes.
And he saw an angel of the Lord in his place on the right side of the altar.
And Zacharias was troubled when he saw him, and fear came on him.
But the angel said, Have no fear, Zacharias, for your prayer has come to the ears of God, and your wife Elisabeth will have a son, and his name will be John.
And you will be glad and have great delight; and numbers of people will have joy at his birth.
For he will be great in the eyes of the Lord; he will not take wine or strong drink; and he will be full of the Spirit of God from his birth.
And through him great numbers of the children of Israel will be turned to the Lord their God.
And he will go before his face in the spirit and power of Elijah, turning the hearts of fathers to their children, and wrongdoers to the way of righteousness; to make ready a people whose hearts have been turned to the Lord.
And Zacharias said to the angel, How may I be certain of this? For I am an old man, and my wife is far on in years.
And the angel, answering, said, I am Gabriel, whose place is before God; I have been sent to say these words to you and to give you this good news.
Now, see, you will be without voice or language till the day when these things come about, because you had not faith in my words, which will have effect at the right time.
And the people were waiting for Zacharias and were surprised because he was in the Temple for such a long time.
And when he came out he was not able to say anything, and they saw that he had seen a vision in the Temple; and he was making signs to them without words.
And when the days of his work in the Temple were ended, he went back to his house.
After that time, Elisabeth, being certain that she was to become a mother, kept herself from men's eyes for five months, saying,
The Lord has done this to me, for his eyes were on me, to take away my shame in the eyes of men.
Now in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a town in Galilee, named Nazareth,
To a virgin who was to be married to a man named Joseph, of the family of David; and the name of the virgin was Mary.
And the angel came in to her and said, Peace be with you, to whom special grace has been given; the Lord is with you.
But she was greatly troubled at his words, and said to herself, What may be the purpose of these words?
And the angel said to her, Have no fear, Mary, for you have God's approval.
And see, you will give birth to a son, and his name will be Jesus.
He will be great, and will be named the Son of the Most High: and the Lord God will give him the kingdom of David, his father:
He will have rule over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there will be no end.
And Mary said to the angel, How may this be, because I have had no knowledge of a man?
And the angel in answer said to her, The Holy Spirit will come on you, and the power of the Most High will come to rest on you, and so that which will come to birth will be named holy, Son of God.
Even now Elisabeth, who is of your family, is to be a mother, though she is old: and this is the sixth month with her who was without children.
For there is nothing which God is not able to do.
And Mary said: I am the servant of the Lord; may it be to me as you say. And the angel went away.
Then Mary got up and went quickly into the high lands, to a town of Judah;
And went into the house of Zacharias and took Elisabeth in her arms.
And when the voice of Mary came to the ears of Elisabeth, the baby made a sudden move inside her; then Elisabeth was full of the Holy Spirit,
And she said with a loud voice: May blessing be on you among women, and a blessing on the child of your body.
How is it that the mother of my Lord comes to me?
For, truly, when the sound of your voice came to my ears, the baby in my body made a sudden move for joy.
Happy will she be who had faith that the things which the Lord has said to her will be done.
And Mary said: My soul gives glory to God;
My spirit is glad in God my Saviour.
For he has had pity on his servant, though she is poor and lowly placed: and from this hour will all generations give witness to the blessing which has come to me.
For he who is strong has done great things for me; and holy is his name.
His mercy is for all generations in whom is the fear of him.
With his arm he has done acts of power; he has put to flight those who have pride in their hearts.
He has put down kings from their seats, lifting up on high the men of low degree.
Those who had no food he made full of good things; the men of wealth he sent away with nothing in their hands;
His help he has given to Israel, his servant, so that he might keep in mind his mercy to Abraham and his seed for ever,
As he gave his word to our fathers.
And Mary was with her for about three months and then went back to her house.
Now it was time for Elisabeth to give birth, and she had a son.
And it came to the ears of her neighbours and relations that the Lord had been very good to her, and they took part in her joy.
And on the eighth day they came to see to the circumcision of the child, and they would have given him the name of Zacharias, his father's name;
But his mother made answer and said, No, his name is John.
And they said, Not one of your relations has that name.
And they made signs to his father, to say what name was to be given to him.
And he sent for writing materials and put down: His name is John; and they were all surprised.
And straight away his mouth was open and his tongue was free and he gave praise to God.
And fear came on all those who were living round about them: and there was much talk about all these things in all the hill-country of Judaea.
And all who had word of them kept them in their minds and said, What will this child be? For the hand of the Lord was with him.
And his father, Zacharias, was full of the Holy Spirit, and with the voice of a prophet said these words:
Praise be to the Lord, the God of Israel, for he has come to his people and made them free,
Lifting up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David,
(As he said, by the mouth of his holy prophets, from the earliest times,)
Salvation from those who are against us, and from the hands of those who have hate for us;
To do acts of mercy to our fathers and to keep in mind his holy word,
The oath which he made to Abraham, our father,
That we, being made free from the fear of those who are against us, might give him worship,
In righteousness and holy living before him all our days.
And you, child, will be named the prophet of the Most High: you will go before the face of the Lord, to make ready his ways;
To give knowledge of salvation to his people, through the forgiveness of sins,
Because of the loving mercies of our God, by which the dawn from heaven has come to us,
To give light to those in dark places, and in the shade of death, so that our feet may be guided into the way of peace.
And the child became tall, and strong in spirit; and he was living in the waste land till the day when he came before the eyes of Israel.
Now after these things, the Lord made selection of seventy others and sent them before him, two together, into every town and place where he himself was about to come.
And he said to them, There is much grain ready to be cut, but not enough workers: so make prayer to the Lord of the grain-fields that he will send workers to get in the grain.
Go on your way: see, I send you out like lambs among wolves.
Take no bag for money or for food, and no shoes; say no word to any man on the way.
And whenever you go into a house, first say, Peace be to this house.
And if a son of peace is there, your peace will be with him: but if not, it will come back to you again.
And keep in that same house, taking what food and drink they give you: for the worker has a right to his reward. Do not go from house to house.
And into whatever town you go, if they take you in, take whatever food is given to you:
And make well those in it who are ill and say to them, The kingdom of God is near to you.
But if you go into a town where they will not have you, go out into the streets of it and say,
Even the dust of your town, which is on our feet, we put off as a witness against you; but be certain of this, that the kingdom of God is near.
I say to you, It will be better in that day for Sodom than for that town.
A curse is on you, Chorazin! A curse is on you, Beth-saida! For if such works of power had been done in Tyre and Sidon as have been done in you, they would have been turned from their sins, in days gone by, seated in the dust.
But it will be better for Tyre and Sidon, in the day of judging, than for you.
And you, Capernaum, were you not lifted up to heaven? you will go down to hell.
Whoever gives ear to you, gives ear to me; and whoever is against you, is against me; and whoever is against me, is against him who sent me.
And the seventy came back with joy, saying, Lord, even the evil spirits are under our power in your name.
And he said, I was watching for Satan, falling from heaven like a star.
See, I have given you power to put your feet on snakes and evil beasts, and over all the strength of him who is against you: and nothing will do you damage.
Do not be glad, however, because you have power over spirits, but because your names are recorded in heaven.
In that same hour he was full of joy in the Holy Spirit and said, I give praise to you, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have kept these things secret from the wise and the men of learning, and have made them clear to little children: for so, O Father, it was pleasing in your eyes.
All things have been given to me by my Father: and no one has knowledge of the Son, but only the Father: and of the Father, but only the Son, and he to whom the Son will make it clear.
And, turning to the disciples, he said privately, Happy are the eyes which see the things you see:
For I say to you that numbers of prophets and kings have had a desire to see the things which you see, and have not seen them, and to have knowledge of the things which have come to your ears, and they had it not.
And a certain teacher of the law got up and put him to the test, saying, Master, what have I to do so that I may have eternal life?
And he said to him, What does the law say, in your reading of it?
And he, answering, said, Have love for the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind; and for your neighbour as for yourself.
And he said, You have given the right answer: do this and you will have life.
But he, desiring to put himself in the right, said to Jesus, And who is my neighbour?
And Jesus, answering him, said, A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and he got into the hands of thieves, who took his clothing and gave him cruel blows, and when they went away, he was half dead.
And by chance a certain priest was going down that way: and when he saw him, he went by on the other side.
And in the same way, a Levite, when he came to the place and saw him, went by on the other side.
But a certain man of Samaria, journeying that way, came where he was, and when he saw him, he was moved with pity for him,
And came to him and put clean linen round his wounds, with oil and wine; and he put him on his beast and took him to a house and took care of him.
And the day after he took two pennies and gave them to the owner of the house and said, Take care of him; and if this money is not enough, when I come again I will give you whatever more is needed.
Which of these three men, in your opinion, was neighbour to the man who came into the hands of thieves?
And he said, The one who had mercy on him. And Jesus said, Go and do the same.
Now, while they were on their way, he came to a certain town; and a woman named Martha took him into her house.
And she had a sister, by name Mary, who took her seat at the Lord's feet and gave attention to his words.
But Martha had her hands full of the work of the house, and she came to him and said, Lord, is it nothing to you that my sister has let me do all the work? Say to her that she is to give me some help.
But the Lord, answering, said to her, Martha, Martha, you are full of care and troubled about such a number of things:
Little is needed, or even one thing only: for Mary has taken that good part, which will not be taken away from her.
And it came about that he was in prayer in a certain place, and when he came to an end, one of his disciples said to him, Lord, will you give us teaching about prayer, as John did to his disciples?
And he said to them, When you say your prayers, say, Father, may your name be kept holy and your kingdom come.
Give us every day bread for our needs.
May we have forgiveness for our sins, as we make free all those who are in debt to us. And let us not be put to the test.
And he said to them, Which of you, having a friend, would go to him in the middle of the night and say to him, Friend, let me have three cakes of bread;
Because a friend of mine has come to me on a journey, and I have nothing to put before him;
And he, from inside the house, would say in answer, Do not be a trouble to me; the door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed; it is not possible for me to get up and give to you?
I say to you, Though he will not get up and give to him, because he is his friend, still, if he keeps on making his request, he will get up and give him as much as he has need of.
And I say to you, Make requests, and they will be answered; what you are searching for, you will get; when you give the sign, the door will be open to you.
For to everyone who makes a request, it will be given; and he who is searching will get his desire; and to him who gives the sign, the door will be open.
And which of you, being a father, will give a stone to his son, who makes request for bread? or for a fish, will give him a snake?
Or for an egg, will give him a scorpion?
If, then, you who are evil are able to give good things to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who make request to him?
And he was sending an evil spirit out of a man who was without the power of talking. And it came about that when the spirit had gone the man had the power of talking; and the people were full of wonder.
But some of them said, He sends out evil spirits by Beelzebul, the ruler of evil spirits.
And others, testing him, were looking for a sign from heaven from him.
But he, having knowledge of their thoughts, said to them, Every kingdom in which there is division is made waste; and a house in which there is division comes to destruction.
If, then, Satan is at war with himself, how will he keep his kingdom? because you say that I send evil spirits out of men by the help of Beelzebul.
And if I, by Beelzebul, send out evil spirits, by whose help do your sons send them out? so let them be your judges.
But if I, by the finger of God, send out evil spirits, then the kingdom of God has overtaken you.
When the strong man armed keeps watch over his house, then his goods are safe:
But when one who is stronger makes an attack on him and overcomes him, he takes away his instruments of war, in which he had put his faith, and makes division of his goods.
He who is not with me is against me, and he who will not give me help in getting people together is driving them away.
The unclean spirit, when he has gone out of a man, goes through dry places, looking for rest; and when he does not get it, he says, I will go back to my house from which I came.
And when he comes, he sees that it has been made fair and clean.
Then he goes and gets seven other spirits more evil than himself, and they go in, and take their places there: and the last condition of that man is worse than the first.
And it came about that when he said these things, a certain woman among the people said in a loud voice, Happy is the body which gave you birth, and the breasts from which you took milk.
But he said, More happy are they who give hearing to the word of God and keep it.
And when a great number of people came together to him, he said, This generation is an evil generation: it is looking for a sign and no sign will be given to it but the sign of Jonah.
For even as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites, so will the Son of man be to this generation.
The queen of the South will come up on the day of judging and give her decision against the men of this generation: for she came from the ends of the earth to give ear to the wisdom of Solomon; and now something greater than Solomon is here.
The men of Nineveh will come up in the day of judging and give their decision against this generation: for they were turned away from their sins at the preaching of Jonah; but now something greater than Jonah is here.
No man, when the light has been lighted, puts it in a secret place, or under a vessel, but on its table, so that those who come in may see the light.
The light of the body is the eye: when your eye is true, all your body is full of light; but when it is evil, your body is dark.
So take care that the light which is in you is not dark.
If, then, all your body is light, with no part of it dark, it will be completely full of light, as when a flame with its bright shining gives you light.
Now, while he was talking, a Pharisee made a request that he would come to a meal with him; and he went in and took his seat at the meal.
And when the Pharisee saw it, he was surprised because he came to the meal without first washing himself.
And the Lord said to him, You Pharisees make the outside of the cup and the plate clean; but inside you are thieves and full of evil.
O you foolish ones! did not he who made the outside in the same way make the inside?
But if you give to the poor such things as you are able, then all things are clean to you.
But a curse is on you, Pharisees! for you make men give a tenth of every sort of plant, and give no thought to right and the love of God; but it is right for you to do these things, and not let the others be undone.
A curse is on you, Pharisees! for your desires are for the most important seats in the Synagogues and for words of respect said to you in the market-place.
A curse is on you! for you are like the resting-places of dead men, which are not seen, and men go walking over them without knowledge of it.
And one of the teachers of the law, answering, said to him, Master, in saying this, you give a bad name to us as to them.
And he said, A curse is on you, teachers of the law! for while other men are crushed under the weight of the rules you make for them, you yourselves do not put so much as one finger to them.
A curse is on you! for you make resting-places for the bodies of the prophets, but your fathers put them to death.
So you are witnesses and give approval to the work of your fathers; for they put them to death and you make their last resting-places.
For this reason the wisdom of God has said, I will send them prophets and teachers, and to some of them they will give death and cruel pains;
So that punishment may come on this generation for the blood of all the prophets which was given from the earliest days;
From the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariah, who was put to death between the altar and the Temple. Yes, I say to you, It will come on this generation.
A curse is on you, teachers of the law! for you have taken away the key of knowledge: you did not go in yourselves, and you got in the way of those who were going in.
And when he had come out of that place, the scribes and the Pharisees came round him angrily, questioning him about more things;
And watching him, for a chance to get something from his words which might be used against him.
At that time, when thousands of the people had come together, in such numbers that they were crushing one another, he said first to his disciples, Have nothing to do with the leaven of the Pharisees, which is deceit.
But nothing is covered up, which will not come to light, or secret, which will not be made clear.
So, whatever you have said in the dark, will come to men's hearing in the light, and what you have said secretly inside the house, will be made public from the house-tops.
And I say to you, my friends, Have no fear of those who may put the body to death, and are able to do no more than that.
But I will make clear to you of whom you are to be in fear: of him who after death has power to send you to hell; yes, truly I say, Have fear of him.
Are not five sparrows given in exchange for two farthings? and God has every one of them in mind.
But even the hairs of your head are numbered. Have no fear: you are of more value than a flock of sparrows.
And I say to you that to everyone who gives witness to me before men, the Son of man will give witness before the angels of God.
But if anyone says before men that he has no knowledge of me, I will say that I have no knowledge of him before the angels of God.
And if anyone says a word against the Son of man, he will have forgiveness: but for him who says evil words against the Holy Spirit, there will be no forgiveness.
And when they take you before the Synagogues and the authorities and the rulers, take no thought about what answers you will give, or what you will say:
For the Holy Spirit will make clear to you in that very hour what to say.
And one of the people said to him, Master, give an order to my brother to make division of the heritage with me.
But he said, Man, who made me a judge or a maker of decisions for you?
And he said to them, Take care to keep yourselves free from the desire for property; for a man's life is not made up of the number of things which he has.
And he said to them, in a story, The land of a certain man of great wealth was very fertile:
And he said to himself, What is to be done? for I have no place in which to put all my fruit.
And he said, This I will do: I will take down my store-houses and make greater ones, and there I will put all my grain and my goods.
And I will say to my soul, Soul, you have a great amount of goods in store, enough for a number of years; be at rest, take food and wine and be happy.
But God said to him, You foolish one, tonight I will take your soul from you, and who then will be the owner of all the things which you have got together?
So that is what comes to the man who gets wealth for himself, and has not wealth in the eyes of God.
And he said to his disciples, For this reason I say to you, Take no thought for your life, about what food you will take, or for your body, how it may be clothed.
Is not life more than food, and the body than its clothing?
Give thought to the ravens; they do not put seeds into the earth, or get together grain; they have no store-houses or buildings; and God gives them their food: of how much greater value are you than the birds!
And which of you by taking thought is able to make himself any taller?
If, then, you are not able to do even that which is least, why are you troubled about the rest?
Give thought to the flowers: they do no work, they make no thread; and still I say to you, Even Solomon, in all his glory, was not clothed like one of these.
But if God gives such clothing to the grass in the field, which today is living, and tomorrow will be burned in the oven, how much more will he give clothing to you, O men of little faith?
And do not give overmuch thought to your food and drink, and let not your mind be full of doubts.
For the nations of the world go in search of all these things: but your Father has knowledge that you have need of them.
But let your chief care be for his kingdom, and these other things will be given to you in addition.
Have no fear, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom.
Give what property you have in exchange for money, and give the money to the poor; make for yourselves money-bags which will not get old, wealth stored up in heaven which will be yours for ever, where thieves will not come nor worms put it to destruction.
For where your wealth is, there will your heart be.
Be ready, dressed as for a journey, with your lights burning.
And be like men who are looking for their lord, when he comes back from the bride-feast; so that when he comes to the door, it will be open to him quickly.
Happy are those servants who are watching when the lord comes; truly I say to you, he will make himself their servant and, placing them at the table, he will come out and give them food.
And if he comes in the second division of the night or in the third, and they are watching for him, happy are those servants.
But be certain of this, that if the master of the house had had knowledge of the time when the thief was coming, he would have been watching, and would not have let his house be broken into.
So be ready: for the Son of man is coming at a time when you are not looking for him.
And Peter said to him, Lord, are these words said to us only, or to all men?
And the Lord said, Who then is the wise and responsible servant whom his lord will put in control of his family, to give them their food at the right time?
Happy is that servant who, when his lord comes, is doing so.
Truly I say to you, he will put him in control of all his goods.
But if that servant says to himself, My lord is a long time coming; and goes about giving blows to the men-servants and the women-servants, feasting and taking overmuch wine;
The lord of that servant will come at a time when he is not looking for him, and at an hour when he is not ready for him, and he will have him cut in two and will give him his part in the fate of those who have no faith;
And the servant who had knowledge of his lord's desires and was not ready for him and did not do as he was ordered, will be given a great number of blows;
But he who, without knowledge, did things for which punishment is given, will get only a small number of blows. The man to whom much is given, will have to give much; if much is given into his care, of him more will be requested.
I came to send a fire on the earth, and it may even now have been lighted.
But there is a baptism which I have to undergo; and how am I kept back till it is complete!
Is it your opinion that I have come to give peace on earth? I say to you, No, but division:
For from this time, a family of five in one house will be on opposite sides, three against two and two against three.
They will be at war, the father against his son, and the son against his father; mother against daughter, and daughter against mother; mother-in-law against daughter-in-law, and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law.
Then he said to the people, When you see a cloud coming up in the west, straight away you say, There will be rain; and so it is.
And when you see a south wind blowing, you say, There will be heat; and so it is.
O false ones! the face of the earth and the heaven is clear to you; how is it that the signs of these times are not as clear to you?
And why are you, in your hearts, unable to be judges of what is right?
For if anyone has a cause at law against you, and you are going with him before the ruler, make an attempt, on the way, to come to an agreement with him, for if you do not, he may take you before the judge and the judge will give you up to the police, and they will put you in prison.
I say to you, You will not come out of it till you have made payment to the very last farthing.
Now some people who were there at that time, gave him an account of how the blood of some Galilaeans had been mixed by Pilate with their offerings.
And he, in answer, said to them, Are you of the opinion that these Galilaeans were worse than all other Galilaeans, because these things were done to them?
I say to you, It is not so: but if your hearts are not changed, you will all come to the same end.
Or those eighteen men who were crushed by the fall of the tower of Siloam, were they worse than all the other men living in Jerusalem?
I say to you, It is not so: but if your hearts are not changed, you will all come to an end in the same way.
And he made up this story for them: A certain man had a fig-tree in his garden, and he came to get fruit from it, and there was no fruit.
And he said to the gardener, See, for three years I have been looking for fruit from this tree, and I have not had any: let it be cut down; why is it taking up space?
And he said, Lord, let it be for this year, and I will have the earth turned up round it, and put animal waste on it, to make it fertile:
And if, after that, it has fruit, it is well; if not, let it be cut down.
And he was teaching in one of the Synagogues on the Sabbath.
And there was a woman who had had a disease for eighteen years; she was bent, and was not able to make herself straight.
And when Jesus saw her, he said to her, Woman, you are made free from your disease.
And he put his hands on her, and she was made straight, and gave praise to God.
And the ruler of the Synagogue was angry because Jesus had made her well on the Sabbath, and he said to the people, There are six days in which men may do work: so come on those days to be made well, and not on the Sabbath.
But the Lord gave him an answer and said, O you false men! do you not, every one of you, on the Sabbath, let loose his ox and his ass and take it to the water?
And is it not right for this daughter of Abraham, who has been in the power of Satan for eighteen years, to be made free on the Sabbath?
And when he said these things, those who were against him were shamed, and all the people were full of joy because of the great things which were done by him.
Then he said, What is the kingdom of God like? what comparison may I make of it?
It is like a grain of mustard seed which a man took and put in his garden, and it became a tree, and the birds of heaven made their resting-places in its branches.
And again he said, What is the kingdom of God like?
It is like leaven, which a woman put into three measures of meal, and it was all leavened.
And he went on his way, through towns and country places, teaching and journeying to Jerusalem.
And someone said to him, Lord, will only a small number have salvation? And he said to them,
Do your best to go in by the narrow door, for I say to you, A number will make the attempt to go in, but will not be able to do so.
When the master of the house has got up, and the door has been shut, and you, still outside, give blows on the door, saying, Lord, let us in; he will make answer and say, I have no knowledge of where you come from.
Then you will say, We have taken food and drink with you, and you were teaching in our streets.
But he will say, Truly, I have no knowledge of you or where you come from; go away from me, you workers of evil.
There will be weeping and cries of sorrow when you see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, but you yourselves are shut outside.
And they will come from the east and from the west, from the north and from the south, and take their places in the kingdom of God.
And the last will be first, and the first will be last.
At that time, certain Pharisees came to him and said, Go away from this place, because Herod's purpose is to put you to death.
And he said, Go and say to that fox, I send out evil spirits and do works of mercy today and tomorrow, and on the third day my work will be complete.
But I have to go on my way today and tomorrow and the third day, for it is not right for a prophet to come to his death outside Jerusalem.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, putting to death the prophets, and stoning those who were sent to her! again and again would I have taken your children to myself, as a bird takes her young ones under her wings, but you would not!
Now see, your house is waste, and I say to you, You will not see me again till you say, A blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord.
And it came about that when he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees on the Sabbath, to have a meal, they were watching him.
And a certain man was there who had a disease.
And Jesus, answering, said to the scribes and Pharisees, Is it right to make people well on the Sabbath or not?
But they said nothing. And he made him well and sent him away.
And he said to them, Which of you, whose ox or ass has got into a water-hole, will not straight away get him out on the Sabbath?
And they had no answer to that question.
And he gave teaching in the form of a story to the guests who came to the feast, when he saw how they took the best seats; saying to them,
When you get a request to come to a feast, do not take the best seat, for a more important man than you may be coming,
And then the giver of the feast will come to you and say, Give your place to this man; and you, with shame, will have to take the lowest seat.
But when you come, go and take the lowest seat, so that when the giver of the feast comes, he may say to you, Friend, come up higher; and then you will have honour in the eyes of all the others who are there.
For every man who gives himself a high place will be put down, but he who takes a low place will be lifted up.
And he said to the master of the house, When you give a feast, do not send for your friends and your brothers and your family or your neighbours who have wealth, for they may give a feast for you, and so you will get a reward.
But when you give a feast, send for the poor and the blind and those who are broken in body:
And you will have a blessing, because they will not be able to give you any payment, and you will get your reward when the upright come back from the dead.
And, hearing these words, one of those who were at table with him said to him, Happy is the man who will be a guest in the kingdom of God.
And he said to them, A certain man gave a great feast, and sent word of it to a number of people.
And when the time had come, he sent his servants to say to them, Come, for all things are now ready.
And they all gave reasons why they were not able to come. The first said to him, I have got a new field, and it is necessary for me to go and see it: I am full of regret that I am unable to come.
And another said, I have got some cattle, and I am going to make a test of them: I am full of regret that I am unable to come.
And another said, I have been married, and so I am not able to come.
And the servant came back and gave his master an account of these things. Then the master of the house was angry and said to the servant, Go out quickly into the streets of the town and get the poor, the blind, and those who are broken in body.
And the servant said, Lord, your orders have been done, and still there is room.
And the lord said to the servant, Go out into the roads and the fields, and make them come in, so that my house may be full.
For I say to you that not one of those who were requested to come will have a taste of my feast.
Now a great number of people went with him.
And turning round, he said to them, If any man comes to me, and has not hate for his father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, and even for his life, he may not be my disciple.
Whoever does not take up his cross and come after me may not be my disciple.
For which of you, desiring to put up a tower, does not first give much thought to the price, if he will have enough to make it complete?
For fear that if he makes a start and is not able to go on with it to the end, all who see it will be laughing at him,
And saying, This man made a start at building and is not able to make it complete.
Or what king, going to war with another king, will not first take thought if he will be strong enough, with ten thousand men, to keep off him who comes against him with twenty thousand?
Or while the other is still a great distance away, he sends representatives requesting conditions of peace.
And so whoever is not ready to give up all he has may not be my disciple.
For salt is good, but if the taste goes from it, of what use is it?
It is no good for the land or for the place of waste; no one has a use for it. He who has ears, let him give ear.
Now all the tax-farmers and sinners came near to give ear to him.
And the Pharisees and scribes were angry, saying, This man gives approval to sinners, and takes food with them.
And he made a story for them, saying,
What man of you, having a hundred sheep, if one of them gets loose and goes away, will not let the ninety-nine be in the waste land by themselves, and go after the wandering one, till he sees where it is?
And when he has got it again, he takes it in his arms with joy.
And when he gets back to his house, he sends for his neighbours and friends, saying to them, Be glad with me, for I have got back my sheep which had gone away.
I say to you that even so there will be more joy in heaven when one sinner is turned away from his wrongdoing, than for ninety-nine good men, who have no need of a change of heart.
Or what woman, having ten bits of silver, if one bit has gone from her hands, will not get a light, and go through her house, searching with care till she sees it?
And when she has it again, she gets her friends and neighbours together, saying, Be glad with me, for I have got back the bit of silver which had gone from me.
Even so, I say to you, There is joy among the angels of God, when one sinner is turned away from his wrongdoing.
And he said, A certain man had two sons:
And the younger of them said to his father, Father, give me that part of your property which will be mine. And he made division of his goods between them.
And not long after, the younger son got together everything which was his and took a journey into a far-away country, and there all his money went in foolish living.
And when everything was gone, there was no food to be had in that country, and he was in need.
And he went and put himself into the hands of one of the people of that country, and he sent him into his fields to give the pigs their food.
And so great was his need that he would have been glad to take the pigs' food, and no one gave him anything.
But when he came to his senses, he said, What numbers of my father's servants have bread enough, and more, while I am near to death here through need of food!
I will get up and go to my father, and will say to him, Father, I have done wrong, against heaven and in your eyes:
I am no longer good enough to be named your son: make me like one of your servants.
And he got up and went to his father. But while he was still far away, his father saw him and was moved with pity for him and went quickly and took him in his arms and gave him a kiss.
And his son said to him, Father, I have done wrong, against heaven and in your eyes: I am no longer good enough to be named your son.
But the father said to his servants, Get out the first robe quickly, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand and shoes on his feet:
And get the fat young ox and put it to death, and let us have a feast, and be glad.
For this, my son, who was dead, is living again; he had gone away from me, and has come back. And they were full of joy.
Now the older son was in the field: and when he came near the house, the sounds of music and dancing came to his ears.
And he sent for one of the servants, questioning him about what it might be.
And he said to him, Your brother has come; and your father has had the young ox put to death because he has come back safely.
But he was angry and would not go in; and his father came out and made a request to him to come in.
But he made answer and said to his father, See, all these years I have been your servant, doing your orders in everything: and you never gave me even a young goat so that I might have a feast with my friends:
But when this your son came, who has been wasting your property with bad women, you put to death the fat young ox for him.
And he said to him, Son, you are with me at all times, and all I have is yours.
But it was right to be glad and to have a feast; for this your brother, who was dead, is living again; he had gone away and has come back.
And another time he said to the disciples, There was a certain man of great wealth who had a servant; and it was said to him that this servant was wasting his goods.
And he sent for him and said, What is this which is said about you? give me an account of all you have done, for you will no longer be the manager of my property.
And the servant said to himself, What am I to do now that my lord takes away my position? I have not enough strength for working in the fields, and I would be shamed if I made requests for money from people in the streets.
I have come to a decision what to do, so that when I am put out of my position they will take me into their houses.
And sending for every one who was in debt to his lord he said to the first, What is the amount of your debt to my lord?
And he said, A hundred measures of oil. And he said, Take your account straight away and put down fifty.
Then he said to another, What is the amount of your debt? And he said, A hundred measures of grain. And he said to him, Take your account and put down eighty.
And his lord was pleased with the false servant, because he had been wise; for the sons of this world are wiser in relation to their generation than the sons of light.
And I say to you, Make friends for yourselves through the wealth of this life, so that when it comes to an end, you may be taken into the eternal resting-places.
He who is true in a little, is true in much; he who is false in small things, is false in great.
If, then, you have not been true in your use of the wealth of this life, who will give into your care the true wealth?
And if you have not been true in your care of the property of other people, who will give you that which is yours?
No man may be a servant to two masters: for he will have hate for the one and love for the other; or he will keep to the one and have no respect for the other. You may not be servants of God and of wealth.
And the Pharisees, who had a great love of money, hearing these things, were making sport of him.
And he said, You take care to seem right in the eyes of men, but God sees your hearts: and those things which are important in the opinion of men, are evil in the eyes of God.
The law and the prophets were till John: but then came the preaching of the kingdom of God, and everyone makes his way into it by force.
But heaven and earth will come to an end before the smallest letter of the law may be dropped out.
Everyone who puts away his wife and takes another, is a false husband: and he who is married to a woman whose husband has put her away, is no true husband to her.
Now there was a certain man of great wealth, who was dressed in fair clothing of purple and delicate linen, and was shining and glad every day.
And a certain poor man, named Lazarus, was stretched out at his door, full of wounds,
Desiring the broken bits of food which came from the table of the man of wealth; and even the dogs came and put their tongues on his wounds.
And in time the poor man came to his end, and angels took him to Abraham's breast. And the man of wealth came to his end, and was put in the earth.
And in hell, being in great pain, lifting up his eyes he saw Abraham, far away, and Lazarus on his breast.
And he gave a cry and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me and send Lazarus, so that he may put the end of his finger in water and put it on my tongue, for I am cruelly burning in this flame.
But Abraham said, Keep in mind, my son, that when you were living, you had your good things, while Lazarus had evil things: but now, he is comforted and you are in pain.
And in addition, there is a deep division fixed between us and you, so that those who might go from here to you are not able to do so, and no one may come from you to us.
And he said, Father, it is my request that you will send him to my father's house;
For I have five brothers; and let him give them an account of these things, so that they may not come to this place of pain.
But Abraham said, They have Moses and the prophets; let them give ear to what they say.
And he said, No, father Abraham, but if someone went to them from the dead, their hearts would be changed.
And he said to him, If they will not give attention to Moses and the prophets, they will not be moved even if someone comes back from the dead.
And he said to his disciples, It is necessary for causes of trouble to come about, but unhappy is he by whom they come.
It would be well for him if a great stone was put round his neck and he was dropped into the sea, before he made trouble for any of these little ones.
Give attention to yourselves: if your brother does wrong, say a sharp word to him; and if he has sorrow for his sin, let him have forgiveness.
And if he does you wrong seven times in a day, and seven times comes to you and says, I have regret for what I have done; let him have forgiveness.
And the twelve said to the Lord, Make our faith greater.
And the Lord said, If your faith was only as great as a grain of mustard seed, you might say to this tree, Be rooted up and planted in the sea; and it would be done.
But which of you, having a servant who is ploughing or keeping sheep, will say to him, when he comes in from the field, Come now and be seated and have a meal,
Will he not say, Get a meal for me, and make yourself ready and see to my needs till I have had my food and drink; and after that you may have yours?
Does he give praise to the servant because he did what was ordered?
In the same way, when you have done all the things which are given you to do, say, There is no profit in us, for we have only done what we were ordered to do.
And it came about that when they were on the way to Jerusalem he went through Samaria and Galilee.
And when he went into a certain small town he came across ten men who were lepers, and they, keeping themselves at a distance,
Said, in loud voices, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us.
And when he saw them he said, Go, and let the priests see you. And, while they were going, they were made clean.
And one of them, when he saw that he was clean, turning back, gave praise to God in a loud voice;
And, falling down on his face at the feet of Jesus, he gave the credit to him; and he was a man of Samaria.
And Jesus said, Were there not ten men who were made clean? where are the nine?
Have not any of them come back to give glory to God, but only this one from a strange land?
And he said to him, Get up, and go on your way; your faith has made you well.
And when the Pharisees put questions to him about when the kingdom of God would come, he gave them an answer and said, The kingdom of God will not come through observation:
And men will not say, See, it is here! or, There! for the kingdom of God is among you.
And he said to his disciples, The time will come when you will have a great desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, but you will not see it.
And if they say to you, See, it is there! or, It is here! do not go away, or go after them.
For as in a thunderstorm the bright light is seen from one end of the sky to the other, so will the Son of man be when his time comes.
But first, he will have to undergo much and be put on one side by this generation.
And as it was in the days of Noah, so will it be in the day of the Son of man.
They were feasting and taking wives and getting married, till the day of the overflowing of the waters, when Noah went into the ark, and they all came to destruction.
In the same way, in the days of Lot; they were feasting and trading, they were planting and building;
But on the day when Lot went out of Sodom, fire came down from heaven and destruction came on them all.
So will it be in the day of the revelation of the Son of man.
On that day, if anyone is on the roof of the house, and his goods are in the house, let him not go down to take them away; and let him who is in the field not go back to his house.
Keep in mind Lot's wife.
If anyone makes an attempt to keep his life, it will be taken from him, but if anyone gives up his life, he will keep it.
I say to you, In that night there will be two men sleeping in one bed, and one will be taken away and the other let go.
Two women will be crushing grain together; one will be taken away and the other let go.
[]
And they, answering him, said, Where, Lord? And he said to them, Where the body is, there will the eagles come together.
And he made a story for them, the point of which was that men were to go on making prayer and not get tired;
Saying, There was a judge in a certain town, who had no fear of God or respect for man:
And there was a widow in that town, and she kept on coming to him and saying, Give me my right against the man who has done me wrong.
And for a time he would not: but later, he said to himself, Though I have no fear of God or respect for man,
Because this widow is a trouble to me, I will give her her right; for if not, I will be completely tired out by her frequent coming.
And the Lord said, Give ear to the words of the evil judge.
And will not God do right in the cause of his saints, whose cries come day and night to his ears, though he is long in doing it?
I say to you that he will quickly do right in their cause. But when the Son of man comes, will there be any faith on earth?
And he made this story for some people who were certain that they were good, and had a low opinion of others:
Two men went up to the Temple for prayer; one a Pharisee, and the other a tax-farmer.
The Pharisee, taking up his position, said to himself these words: God, I give you praise because I am not like other men, who take more than their right, who are evil-doers, who are untrue to their wives, or even like this tax-farmer.
Twice in the week I go without food; I give a tenth of all I have.
The tax-farmer, on the other hand, keeping far away, and not lifting up even his eyes to heaven, made signs of grief and said, God, have mercy on me, a sinner.
I say to you, This man went back to his house with God's approval, and not the other: for everyone who makes himself high will be made low and whoever makes himself low will be made high.
And they took their children to him, so that he might put his hands on them: but when the disciples saw it, they said sharp words to them
But Jesus sent for them, saying, Let the children come to me, and do not keep them away, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.
Truly I say to you, Whoever does not put himself under the kingdom of God like a little child, will not come into it at all.
And a certain ruler put a question to him, saying, Good Master, what have I to do so that I may have eternal life?
And Jesus said to him, Why do you say that I am good? No one is good, but only God.
You have knowledge of what the law says: Do not be untrue to your wife, Do not put anyone to death, Do not take what is not yours, Do not give false witness, Give honour to your father and mother.
And he said, All these things I have done from the time when I was a boy.
And Jesus, hearing it, said to him, One thing you still have need of; get money for your goods, and give it away to the poor, and you will have wealth in heaven; and come after me.
But at these words he became very sad, for he had great wealth.
And Jesus, looking at him, said, How hard it is for those who have wealth to get into the kingdom of God!
It is simpler for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a man who has much money to come into the kingdom of God.
And those who were present said, Then who may have salvation?
But he said, Things which are not possible with man are possible with God.
And Peter said, See, we have given up what is ours to come after you.
And he said to them, Truly I say to you, There is no man who has given up house or wife or brothers or father or mother or children, because of the kingdom of God,
Who will not get much more in this time, and in the world to come, eternal life.
And he took with him the twelve and said to them, Now we are going up to Jerusalem, and all the things which were said by the prophets will be done to the Son of man.
For he will be given up to the Gentiles, and will be made sport of and put to shame:
And he will be given cruel blows and put to death, and on the third day he will come back to life.
But they did not take in the sense of any of these words, and what he said was not clear to them, and their minds were not able to see it.
And it came about that when he got near Jericho, a certain blind man was seated by the side of the road, making requests for money from those who went by.
And hearing the sound of a great number of people going by, he said, What is this?
And they said to him, Jesus of Nazareth is going by.
And he said in a loud voice, Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me.
And those who were in front made protests and said to him, Be quiet: but he said all the more, O Son of David, have mercy on me.
And Jesus, stopping, gave orders that he was to come to him, and when he came near, he said to him,
What would you have me do for you? And he said, Lord, that I may be able to see again.
And Jesus said, See again: your faith has made you well.
And straight away he was able to see, and he went after him, giving glory to God; and all the people when they saw it gave praise to God.
And he went into Jericho, and when he was going through it,
A man, named Zacchaeus, who was the chief tax-farmer, and a man of wealth,
Made an attempt to get a view of Jesus, and was not able to do so, because of the people, for he was a small man.
And he went quickly in front of them and got up into a tree to see him, for he was going that way.
And when Jesus came to the place, looking up, he said to him, Zacchaeus, be quick and come down, for I am coming to your house today.
And he came down quickly, and took him into his house with joy.
And when they saw it, they were all angry, saying, He has gone into the house of a sinner.
And Zacchaeus, waiting before him, said to the Lord, See, Lord, half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken anything from anyone wrongly, I give him back four times as much.
And Jesus said to him, Today salvation has come to this house, for even he is a son of Abraham.
For the Son of man came to make search for those who are wandering from the way, and to be their Saviour.
And while they were giving ear to these words, he made another story for them, because he was near Jerusalem, and because they were of the opinion that the kingdom of God was coming straight away.
So he said, A certain man of high birth went into a far-away country to get a kingdom for himself, and to come back.
And he sent for ten of his servants and gave them ten pounds and said to them, Do business with this till I come.
But his people had no love for him, and sent representatives after him, saying, We will not have this man for our ruler.
And when he came back again, having got his kingdom, he gave orders for those servants to whom he had given the money to come to him, so that he might have an account of what business they had done.
And the first came before him, saying, Lord, your pound has made ten pounds.
And he said to him, You have done well, O good servant: because you have done well in a small thing you will have authority over ten towns.
And another came, saying, Your pound has made five pounds.
And he said, You will be ruler over five towns.
And another came, saying, Lord, here is your pound, which I put away in a cloth;
Because I was in fear of you, for you are a hard man: you take up what you have not put down, and get in grain where you have not put seed.
He said to him, By the words of your mouth you will be judged, you bad servant. You had knowledge that I am a hard man, taking up what I have not put down and getting in grain where I have not put seed;
Why then did you not put my money in a bank, so that when I came I would get it back with interest?
And he said to the others who were near, Take the pound away from him, and give it to the man who has ten.
And they say to him, Lord, he has ten pounds.
And I say to you that to everyone who has, more will be given, but from him who has not, even what he has will be taken away.
And as for those who were against me, who would not have me for their ruler, let them come here, and be put to death before me.
And when he had said this, he went on in front of them, going up to Jerusalem.
And it came about that when he got near Beth-phage and Bethany by the mountain which is named the Mountain of Olives, he sent two of the disciples,
Saying, Go into the little town in front of you, and on going in you will see a young ass fixed with a cord, on which no man has ever been seated; let him loose and take him.
And if anyone says to you, Why are you taking him? say, The Lord has need of him.
And those whom he sent went away, and it was as he said.
And when they were getting the young ass, the owners of it said to them, Why are you taking the young ass?
And they said, The Lord has need of him.
And they took him to Jesus, and they put their clothing on the ass, and Jesus got on to him.
And while he went on his way they put their clothing down on the road in front of him.
And when he came near the foot of the Mountain of Olives, all the disciples with loud voices gave praise to God with joy, because of all the great works which they had seen;
Saying, A blessing on the King who comes in the name of the Lord; peace in heaven and glory in the highest.
And some of the Pharisees among the people said to him, Master, make your disciples be quiet.
And he said in answer, I say to you, if these men keep quiet, the very stones will be crying out.
And when he got near and saw the town, he was overcome with weeping for it,
Saying, If you, even you, had knowledge today, of the things which give peace! but you are not able to see them.
For the time will come when your attackers will put a wall round you, and come all round you and keep you in on every side,
And will make you level with the earth, and your children with you; and there will not be one stone resting on another in you, because you did not see that it was your day of mercy.
And he went into the Temple and put out those who were trading there,
Saying to them, It has been said, My house is to be a house of prayer, but you have made it a hole of thieves.
And every day he was teaching in the Temple. But the chief priests and the scribes and the rulers of the people were attempting to put him to death;
But they were not able to do anything, because the people all kept near him, being greatly interested in his words.
Now it came about in those days that an order went out from Caesar Augustus that there was to be a numbering of all the world.
This was the first numbering, which was made when Quirinius was ruler of Syria.
And all men went to be numbered, everyone to his town.
And Joseph went up from Galilee, out of the town of Nazareth, into Judaea, to Beth-lehem, the town of David, because he was of the house and family of David,
To be put on the list with Mary, his future wife, who was about to become a mother.
And while they were there, the time came for her to give birth.
And she had her first son; and folding him in linen, she put him to rest in the place where the cattle had their food, because there was no room for them in the house.
And in the same country there were keepers of sheep in the fields, watching over their flock by night.
And an angel of the Lord came to them, and the glory of the Lord was shining round about them: and fear came on them.
And the angel said, Have no fear; for truly, I give you good news of great joy which will be for all the people:
For on this day, in the town of David, a Saviour has come to birth, who is Christ the Lord.
And this is the sign to you: you will see a young child folded in linen, in the place where the cattle have their food.
And suddenly there was with the angel a great band of spirits from heaven, giving praise to God, and saying,
Glory to God in the highest, and on the earth peace among men with whom he is well pleased.
And when the angels had gone away from them into heaven, the keepers of the sheep said to one another, Let us go now to Beth-lehem, and see this thing which has come about, which the Lord has made clear to us.
And they came quickly, and saw Mary and Joseph, and the child in the place where the cattle had their food.
And when they saw it, they gave them an account of the things which had been said to them about the child.
And all those to whose ears it came were full of wonder at the things said by the keepers of the sheep.
But Mary kept all these words in her heart, and gave much thought to them.
Then the keepers of the sheep went back, giving glory and praise to God for all the things which had come to their ears and which they had seen, as it had been said to them.
And when, after eight days, the time came for his circumcision, he was named Jesus, the name which the angel had given to him before his birth.
And when the necessary days for making them clean by the law of Moses had come to an end, they took him to Jerusalem to give him to the Lord
(As it says in the law of the Lord, Every mother's first male child is to be holy to the Lord),
And to make an offering, as it is ordered in the law of the Lord, of two doves or other young birds.
And there was then in Jerusalem a man whose name was Simeon; and he was an upright man, fearing God and waiting for the comfort of Israel: and the Holy Spirit was on him.
And he had knowledge, through the Holy Spirit, that he would not see death till he had seen the Lord's Christ.
And full of the Spirit he came into the Temple; and when the father and mother came in with the child Jesus, to do with him what was ordered by the law,
Then he took him in his arms and gave praise to God and said,
Now you are letting your servant go in peace, O Lord, as you have said;
For my eyes have seen your salvation,
Which you have made ready before the face of all nations;
A light of revelation to the Gentiles, and the glory of your people Israel.
And his father and mother were full of wonder at the things which were said about him.
And Simeon gave them his blessing and said to Mary, his mother, See, this child will be the cause of the downfall and the lifting up of great numbers of people in Israel, and he will be a sign against which hard words will be said;
(And a sword will go through your heart;) so that the secret thoughts of men may come to light.
And there was one, Anna, a woman prophet, the daughter of Phanuel, of the family of Asher (she was very old, and after seven years of married life
She had been a widow for eighty-four years); she was in the Temple at all times, worshipping with prayers and going without food, night and day.
And coming up at that time, she gave praise to God, talking of him to all those who were waiting for the freeing of Jerusalem.
And when they had done all the things which were ordered by the law of the Lord, they went back to Galilee, to Nazareth, the town where they were living.
And the child became tall and strong and full of wisdom, and the grace of God was on him.
And every year his father and mother went to Jerusalem at the feast of the Passover.
And when he was twelve years old, they went up, as their way was, to the feast;
And when the days of the feast came to an end and they were going back, the boy Jesus was still in Jerusalem, but they had no knowledge of it:
And in the belief that he was with some of their number, they went a day's journey; and after looking for him among their relations and friends,
And seeing that he was not there, they went back to Jerusalem, to make search for him.
And after three days they came across him in the Temple, seated among the wise men, giving ear to their words and putting questions to them.
And all to whose ears it came were full of wonder at his knowledge and the answers which he gave.
And when they saw him they were surprised, and his mother said to him, Son, why have you done this to us? see, your father and I have been looking for you with sorrow.
And he said to them, Why were you looking for me? was it not clear to you that my right place was in my Father's house?
And his words seemed strange to them.
And he went down with them and came to Nazareth; and did as he was ordered: and his mother kept all these words in her heart.
And Jesus was increasing in wisdom and in years, and in grace before God and men.
And it came about on one of those days, when he was teaching the people in the Temple and preaching the good news,
That the chief priests and the scribes and the rulers of the people came to him and said, Make clear to us by what authority you do these things and who gave you this authority.
And in answer he said to them, I will put a question to you, and do you give me an answer:
The baptism of John, was it from heaven or of men?
And they said among themselves, If we say, From heaven; he will say, Why did you not have faith in him?
But if we say, Of men; we will be stoned by the people, for they are certain that John was a prophet.
And they made answer that they had no idea where it came from.
And Jesus said, And I will not make clear to you by what authority I do these things.
And he gave the people this story: A man made a vine-garden and gave the use of it to some field-workers and went into another country for a long time.
And at the right time he sent a servant to the workers to get part of the fruit from the vines; but the workmen gave him blows and sent him away with nothing.
And he sent another servant, and they gave blows to him in the same way, and put shame on him, and sent him away with nothing.
And he sent a third, and they gave him wounds and put him out.
And the lord of the garden said, What am I to do? I will send my dearly loved son; they may give respect to him.
But when the workmen saw him, they said to one another, This is he who will one day be the owner of the property: let us put him to death and the heritage will be ours.
And driving him out of the garden they put him to death. Now what will the lord do to these workmen?
He will come and put them to destruction and give the garden to others. And when he said this, they said, May it not be so.
But he, looking on them, said, Is it not in the Writings, The stone which the builders put on one side, the same has become the chief stone of the building?
Everyone falling on that stone will be broken, but the man on whom the stone comes down will be crushed to dust.
And the chief priests and the scribes made attempts to get their hands on him in that very hour; and they were in fear of the people, for they saw that he had made up this story against them.
And they kept watch on him, and sent out secret representatives, who were acting the part of good men, in order that they might get something from his words, on account of which they might give him up to the government and into the power of the ruler.
And they put a question to him, saying, Master, we are certain that your teaching and your words are right, and that you have no respect for a man's position, but you are teaching the true way of God:
Is it right for us to make payment of taxes to Caesar or not?
But he saw through their trick and said to them,
Let me see a penny. Whose image and name are on it? And they said, Caesar's.
And he said, Then give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the things which are God's.
And they were not able to get anything from these words before the people: but they were full of wonder at his answer, and said nothing.
And some of the Sadducees came to him, who say that there is no coming back from the dead; and they said to him,
Master, Moses said that if a man's brother comes to his end, having a wife, but no children, his brother is to take the wife, and get a family for his brother.
Now there were seven brothers, and the first had a wife and came to his end, having no children;
And the second;
And the third took her; and in the same way, all the seven, without having any children, came to their end.
And last of all, the woman came to her end.
When they come back from the dead, whose wife will she be? for all the seven had her.
And Jesus said to them, The sons of this world are married and have wives;
But those to whom is given the reward of the world to come, and to come back from the dead, have no wives, and are not married;
And death has no more power over them, for they are equal to the angels, and are sons of God, being of those who will come back from the dead.
But even Moses made it clear that the dead come back to life, saying, in the story of the burning thorn-tree, The Lord, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
Now he is not the God of the dead but of the living: for all men are living to him.
And some of the scribes, in answer to this, said, Master, you have said well.
And they had fear of putting any more questions to him.
And he said to them, Why do they say that the Christ is the son of David?
For David himself says in the book of Psalms, The Lord said to my Lord, Take your seat at my right hand,
Till I put under your feet all those who are against you.
David then gives him the name of Lord, so how is it possible for him to be his son?
And in the hearing of all the people he said to his disciples,
Keep away from the scribes, whose pleasure it is to go about in long robes, and to have words of respect said to them in the market-places, and to take the chief seats in the Synagogues and the first places at feasts;
Who take the property of widows and before the eyes of men make long prayers; they will get a greater punishment.
And looking up, he saw the men of wealth putting their offerings in the money-box.
And he saw a certain poor widow putting in a farthing.
And he said, Truly I say to you, This poor widow has given more than all of them:
For they gave out of their wealth, having more than enough for themselves: but she, even out of her need, has put in all her living.
And some were talking about the Temple, how it was made fair with beautiful stones and with offerings, but he said,
As for these things which you see, the days will come when not one stone will be resting on another, but all will be broken down.
And they said to him, Master, when will these things be? and what sign will there be when these events are to take place?
And he said, Take care that you are not tricked: for a number of people will come in my name, saying, I am he; and, The time is near: do not go after them.
And when news of wars and troubled times comes to your ears, have no fear; for these things have to be, but the end will not be now.
Then he said to them, Nation will be moved against nation and kingdom against kingdom:
There will be great earth-shocks and outbursts of disease in a number of places, and men will be without food; and there will be wonders and great signs from heaven.
But before all this, they will take you and be very cruel to you, giving you up to the Synagogues and to prisons, taking you before kings and rulers, because of my name.
And it will be turned to a witness for you.
So take care not to be troubled before the time comes, about what answers you will give:
For I will give you words and wisdom, so that not one of those who are against you will be able to get the better of you, or to put you in the wrong.
But you will be given up even by your fathers and mothers, your brothers and relations and friends; and some of you will be put to death.
And you will be hated by all men, because of me.
But not a hair of your head will come to destruction.
By going through all these things, you will keep your lives.
But when you see armies all round about Jerusalem, then be certain that her destruction is near.
Then let those who are in Judaea go in flight to the mountains; and those who are in the middle of the town go out; and let not those who are in the country come in.
For these are the days of punishment, in which all the things in the Writings will be put into effect.
It will be hard for women who are with child, and for her with a baby at the breast, in those days. For great trouble will come on the land, and wrath on this people.
And they will be put to death with the sword, and will be taken as prisoners into all the nations; and Jerusalem will be crushed under the feet of the Gentiles, till the times of the Gentiles are complete.
And there will be signs in the sun and moon and stars; and on the earth, fear among the nations and doubt because of the loud noise of the sea and the waves;
Men's strength will go from them in fear and in waiting for the things which are coming on the earth; for the powers of the heavens will be moved.
And then they will see the Son of man coming in a cloud, with power and great glory.
But when these things come about, let your heads be lifted up, because your salvation is near.
And he made a story for them: See the fig-tree, and all the trees;
When they put out their young leaves, you take note of it, and it is clear to you that summer is coming.
In the same way, when you see these things taking place you may be certain that the kingdom of God is near.
Truly I say to you, This generation will not come to an end till all things are complete.
Heaven and earth will come to an end, but my words will not come to an end.
But give attention to yourselves, for fear that your hearts become over-full of the pleasures of food and wine, and the cares of this life, and that day may come on you suddenly, and take you as in a net:
For so it will come on all those who are living on the face of all the earth.
But keep watch at all times with prayer, that you may be strong enough to come through all these things and take your place before the Son of man.
And every day he was teaching in the Temple and every night he went out to the mountain which is named the Mountain of Olives to take his rest.
And all the people came early in the morning to give ear to his words in the Temple.
Now the feast of unleavened bread was near, which is called the Passover.
And the chief priests and the scribes were looking for a chance to put him to death, but they went in fear of the people.
And Satan came into Judas Iscariot, who was one of the twelve.
And he went away and had a discussion with the chief priests and the rulers, about how he might give him up to them.
And they were glad, and undertook to give him money.
And he made an agreement with them to give him up to them, if he got a chance, when the people were not present.
And the day of unleavened bread came, when the Passover lamb is put to death.
And Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, Go and make the Passover ready for us, so that we may take it.
And they said to him, Where are we to get it ready?
And he said to them, When you go into the town you will see a man coming to you with a vessel of water; go after him into the house into which he goes.
And say to the master of the house, The Master says, Where is the guest-room, where I may take the Passover with my disciples?
And he will take you up to a great room with a table and seats: there make ready.
And they went, and it was as he had said: and they made the Passover ready.
And when the time had come, he took his seat, and the Apostles with him.
And he said, I have had a great desire to keep this Passover with you before I come to my death;
For I say to you, I will not take it till it is made complete in the kingdom of God.
And he took a cup and, having given praise, he said, Make division of this among yourselves;
For I say to you, I will not take of the fruit of the vine till the kingdom of God has come.
And he took bread and, having given praise, he gave it to them when it had been broken, saying, This is my body, which is given for you: do this in memory of me.
And in the same way, after the meal, he took the cup, saying, This cup is the new testament, made with my blood which is given for you.
But the hand of him who is false to me is with me at the table.
For it will be done to the Son of man after the purpose of God, but unhappy is that man by whom he is given up.
And they were wondering among themselves which of them it was who would do this thing.
And there was an argument among them about which of them was the greatest.
And he said, The kings of the Gentiles are lords over them, and those who have authority are given names of honour.
But let it not be so with you; but he who is greater, let him become like the younger; and he who is chief, like a servant.
For which is greater, the guest who is seated at a meal or the servant who is waiting on him? is it not the guest? but I am among you as a servant.
But you are those who have kept with me through my troubles;
And I will give you a kingdom as my Father has given one to me,
So that you may take food and drink at my table in my kingdom, and be seated like kings, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
Simon, Simon, Satan has made a request to have you, so that he may put you to the test as grain is tested:
But I have made prayer for you, that your faith may not go from you: and when you are turned again, make your brothers strong.
And he said to him, Lord, I am ready to go with you to prison and to death.
And he said, I say to you, Peter, before the cock's second cry today, you will say three times that you have no knowledge of me.
And he said to them, When I sent you out without money or bag or shoes, were you in need of anything? And they said, Nothing.
And he said to them, But now, he who has a money-bag, or a bag for food, let him take it: and he who has not, let him give his coat for money and get a sword.
For I say to you that these words will be put into effect in me, And he was numbered among the evil-doers: for what has been said in the Writings about me has an end.
And they said, Lord, here are two swords. And he said, It is enough.
And he came out, and went, as his way was, to the Mountain of Olives, and the disciples went with him.
And when he came to the place, he said to them, Make a prayer that you may not be put to the test.
And he went a little distance away from them and, falling on his knees in prayer, he said,
Father, if it is your pleasure, take this cup from me: but still, let your pleasure, not mine, be done.
And an angel from heaven came to him, to give him strength.
And being in great trouble of soul, the force of his prayer became stronger, and great drops, like blood, came from him, falling to the earth.
And, getting up from prayer, he came to the disciples, and saw that they were sleeping for sorrow.
And he said, Why are you sleeping? Get up, and give yourselves to prayer, so that you may not be put to the test.
And while he was saying these words, there came a band of people, and Judas, one of the twelve, was in front of them, and he came near to Jesus to give him a kiss.
But Jesus said to him, Judas, will you be false to the Son of man with a kiss?
And when those who were with him saw what was coming, they said, Lord, may we not make use of our swords?
And one of them gave a blow to the servant of the high priest, cutting off his right ear.
But Jesus, answering, said, Put up with this, at least. And touching his ear, he made it well.
And Jesus said to the chief priests and the captains of the Temple and the rulers, who had come against him, Have you come out as against a thief, with swords and sticks?
When I was in the Temple with you every day, your hands were not stretched out against me: but this is your hour, and the authority of the dark power.
And they made him a prisoner and took him away to the house of the high priest. But Peter went after them at a distance.
And a fire was lighted in the middle of the open square, and they were seated together, and Peter was among them.
And a certain woman-servant, seeing him in the light of the fire, and looking at him with attention, said, This man was with him.
But he said, Woman, it is not true; I have no knowledge of him.
And after a little time, another saw him and said, You are one of them; and he said, Man, I am not.
And after about an hour, another man said, with decision, Certainly this man was with him, for he is a Galilaean.
And Peter said, Man, I have no knowledge of these things of which you are talking. And straight away, while he was saying these words, there came the cry of a cock.
And the Lord, turning, gave Peter a look. And the words of the Lord came to Peter's mind, how he had said, This night, before the hour of the cock's cry, you will be false to me three times.
And he went out, weeping bitterly.
And the men in whose hands Jesus was, made sport of him and gave him blows.
And, covering his eyes, they said to him, Are you prophet enough to say who gave you that blow?
And they said a number of other evil things against him.
And when it was day, the rulers of the people came together, with the chief priests and the scribes, and they took him before their Sanhedrin, saying,
If you are the Christ, say so. But he said, If I say so you will not have belief;
And if I put a question to you, you will not give an answer.
But in the future the Son of man will be seated at the right hand of the power of God.
And they all said, Are you then the Son of God? and he said, You say that I am.
And they said, What more need have we of witness? we have the very words of his mouth.
And they all went and took him before Pilate.
And they made statements against him, saying, This man has to our knowledge been teaching our nation to do wrong, and not to make payment of taxes to Caesar, even saying that he himself is Christ, a king.
And Pilate said to him, Are you the King of the Jews? And he said in answer, You say so.
And Pilate said to the chief priests and the people, In my opinion this man has done no wrong.
But they became more violent than before, saying, He has made trouble among the people, teaching through all Judaea from Galilee to this place.
But at these words Pilate said, Is the man a Galilaean?
And when he saw that he was under the authority of Herod, he sent him to Herod, who was in Jerusalem himself at that time.
Now when Herod saw Jesus he was very glad, having for a long time had a desire to see him, for he had had accounts of him, and was hoping to see some wonders done by him.
And he put a great number of questions to him, but he said nothing.
And the chief priests and the scribes were there, making statements against him violently.
And Herod, with the men of his army, put shame on him and made sport of him, and dressing him in shining robes, he sent him back to Pilate.
And that day Herod and Pilate became friends with one another, for before they had been against one another.
And Pilate sent for the chief priests and the rulers and the people, and said to them,
You say that this man has been teaching the people evil things: now I, after going into the question before you, see nothing wrong in this man in connection with the things which you have said against him:
And Herod is of the same opinion, for he has sent him back to us; for, you see, he has done nothing for which I might put him to death.
And so I will give him punishment and let him go.
[]
But with loud voices they said all together, Put this man to death, and make Barabbas free.
Now this man was in prison because of an attack against the government in the town, in which there had been loss of life.
And Pilate again said to them that it was his desire to let Jesus go free.
But crying out they said, To the cross with him!
And he said to them a third time, Why, what evil has he done? I see no reason for putting him to death: I will give him punishment and let him go.
But they went on crying out loudly, Let him be put to death on the cross. And they had their way.
And Pilate gave his decision for their desire to be put into effect.
And in answer to their request, he let that man go free who had been in prison for acting against the government and causing death, and Jesus he gave up to their pleasure.
And while they were taking him away, they put their hands on Simon of Cyrene, who was coming from the country, and made him take the cross after Jesus.
And a great band of people went after him, and of women making signs of grief and weeping for him.
But Jesus, turning to them, said, Daughters of Jerusalem, let not your weeping be for me, but for yourselves and for your children.
For the days are coming in which they will say, Happy are those who have had no children, whose bodies have never given birth, whose breasts have never given milk.
And they will say to the mountains, Come down on us, and to the hills, Be a cover over us.
For if they do these things when the tree is green, what will they do when it is dry?
And two others, evil-doers, were taken with him to be put to death.
And when they came to the place which is named Golgotha, they put him on the cross, and the evil-doers, one on the right side, and the other on the left.
And Jesus said, Father, let them have forgiveness, for they have no knowledge of what they are doing. And they made division of his clothing among them by the decision of chance.
And the people were looking on. And the rulers made sport of him, saying, He was a saviour of others; let him do something for himself, if he is the Christ, the man of God's selection.
And the men of the army made sport of him, coming to him and giving him bitter wine,
And saying, If you are the King of the Jews, get yourself free.
And these words were put in writing over him, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
And one of the evil-doers on the cross, with bitter feeling, said to him, Are you not the Christ? Get yourself and us out of this.
But the other, protesting, said, Have you no fear of God? for you have a part in the same punishment,
And with reason; for we have the right reward of our acts, but this man has done nothing wrong.
And he said, Jesus, keep me in mind when you come in your kingdom.
And he said to him, Truly I say to you, Today you will be with me in Paradise.
And it was now about the sixth hour; and all the land was dark till the ninth hour;
The light of the sun went out, and the curtain in the Temple was parted in two.
And Jesus gave a loud cry and said, Father, into your hands I give my spirit: and when he had said this, he gave up his spirit.
And when the captain saw what was done, he gave praise to God, saying, Without doubt this was an upright man.
And all the people who had come together to see it, when they saw the things which were done, went back again making signs of grief.
And all his friends and the women who came with him from Galilee, were waiting at a distance, watching these things.
Now there was a man named Joseph, a man of authority and a good and upright man
(He had not given his approval to their decision or their acts), of Arimathaea, a town of the Jews, who was waiting for the kingdom of God:
This man went to Pilate and made a request for the body of Jesus.
And he took it down, and folding it in a linen cloth, he put it in a place cut in the rock for a dead body; and no one had ever been put in it.
Now it was the day of making ready and the Sabbath was coming on.
And the women who had come with him from Galilee went after him and saw the place and how his body had been put to rest;
And they went back and got ready spices and perfumes; and on the Sabbath they took their rest, in agreement with the law.
But on the first day of the week, at dawn, they came to the place where his body had been put, taking the spices which they had got ready.
And they saw that the stone had been rolled away.
And they went in, but the body of the Lord Jesus was not there.
And while they were in doubt about it, they saw two men in shining clothing by them:
And while their faces were bent down to the earth in fear, these said to them, Why are you looking for the living among the dead?
He is not here, he has come back to life: have in mind what he said to you when he was still in Galilee, saying,
The Son of man will be given up into the hands of evil-doers, and be put to death on the cross, and on the third day he will come back to life.
And his words came back into their minds,
And they went away from that place and gave an account of all these things to the eleven disciples and all the others.
Now they were Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary, the mother of James: and the other women with them said these things to the Apostles.
But these words seemed foolish to them, and they had no belief in them.
But Peter got up and went to the place where the body had been put, and looking in he saw nothing but the linen cloths, and he went to his house full of wonder at what had taken place.
And then, two of them, on that very day, were going to a little town named Emmaus, which was about seven miles from Jerusalem.
And they were talking together about all those things which had taken place.
And while they were talking and questioning together, Jesus himself came near and went with them.
But their eyes were not open that they might have knowledge of him.
And he said to them, What are you talking about together while you go?
Then stopping, and looking sadly at him, one of them, named Cleopas, said to him, Are you the only man living in Jerusalem who has not had news of the things which have taken place there at this time?
And he said to them, What things? And they said, The things to do with Jesus of Nazareth, who was a prophet, great in his acts and his words, before God and all the people:
And how the chief priests and our rulers gave him up to be put to death on the cross.
But we were hoping that he would be the Saviour of Israel. In addition to all this he has now let three days go by from the time when these things took place;
And certain women among us gave us cause for wonder, for they went early to the place where his body had been put,
And it was not there; then they came saying that they had seen a vision of angels who said that he was living.
And some of those who were with us went to the place, and saw that it was as the women had said, but him they did not see.
And he said, O foolish men! how slow you are to give belief to what the prophets have said.
Was it not necessary for the Christ to go through these things, and to come into his glory?
And he made clear to them all the things in the Writings, from Moses and from all the prophets, which had to do with himself.
And they came near the town to which they were going, and he seemed as if he was going on;
But they kept him back, saying, Do not go, for evening is near, the day is almost gone. And he went in with them.
And when he was seated with them at table, he took the bread, and said words of blessing and, making division of it, he gave it to them.
And then their eyes were open, and they had knowledge of him, but he went from their view.
And they said to one another, Were not our hearts burning in us while he was talking to us on the way, making clear to us the holy Writings?
And that very hour they got up and went back to Jerusalem, where the eleven and the others had come together.
And they said to them, The Lord has truly come back to life again, and Simon has seen him.
And they gave an account of the things which had taken place on the way, and how, when he gave them bread, they had knowledge of him.
And while they were saying these things, he himself was among them, and said to them, Peace be with you!
But they were full of fear, being of the opinion that they were seeing a spirit.
And he said to them, Why are you troubled, and why are your hearts full of doubt?
See; my hands and my feet: it is I myself; put your hands on me and make certain; for a spirit has not flesh and bones as you see that I have.
And when he had said this, he let them see his hands and his feet.
And because, for joy and wonder, they were still in doubt, he said to them, Have you any food here?
And they gave him a bit of cooked fish.
And before their eyes he took a meal.
And he said to them, These are the words which I said to you when I was still with you, how it was necessary for all the things which are in the writings of Moses and the prophets and in the Psalms about me, to be put into effect.
Then he made the holy Writings clear to their minds.
And he said to them, So it is in the Writings that the Christ would undergo death, and come back to life again on the third day;
And that teaching about a change of heart and forgiveness of sins is to be given to Jerusalem first and to all nations in his name.
You are witnesses of these things.
And now I will send to you what my father has undertaken to give you, but do not go from the town, till the power from heaven comes to you.
And he took them out till they were near Bethany, and lifting up his hands, he gave them a blessing.
And while he was doing so, he went from them and was taken up into heaven.
And they gave him worship and went back to Jerusalem with great joy.
And they were in the Temple at all times, giving praise to God.
Now in the fifteenth year of the rule of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being ruler of Judaea, and Herod being king of Galilee, his brother Philip king of the country of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias king of Abilene,
When Annas and Caiaphas were high priests, the word of the Lord came to John, the son of Zacharias, in the waste land.
And he came into all the country round about Jordan, preaching baptism as a sign of forgiveness of sin for those whose hearts were changed.
As it says in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet, The voice of one crying in the waste land, Make ready the way of the Lord, make his roads straight.
Every valley will be lifted up, and all the mountains and hills made low, and the twisted will be made straight, and the rough ways smooth;
And all flesh will see the salvation of God.
So he said to the people who went out to him for baptism: You offspring of snakes, at whose word are you going in flight from the wrath to come?
Make clear by your acts that your hearts have been changed; and do not say to yourselves, We have Abraham for our father: for I say to you that God is able from these stones to make children of Abraham.
And even now the axe is put to the root of the trees; and every tree which does not have good fruit will be cut down and put into the fire.
And the people put questions to him, saying, What have we to do?
And he made answer and said to them, He who has two coats, let him give to him who has not even one; and he who has food, let him do the same.
Then tax-farmers came to him for baptism and said to him, Master, what have we to do?
And he said to them, Do not make an attempt to get more money than the right amount.
And men of the army put questions to him, saying, And what have we to do? And he said to them, Do no violent acts to any man, and do not take anything without right, and let your payment be enough for you.
And while the people were waiting, and all men were questioning in their hearts about John, if he was the Christ or not,
John made answer, saying to them all, Truly, I give you baptism with water, but one is coming who is greater than I, whose shoes I am not good enough to undo: he will give you baptism with the Holy Spirit, and with fire:
In whose hand is the instrument with which he will make clean his grain; he will put the good grain in his store, but the waste will be burned in the fire which will never be put out.
And so comforting them with these and other words, he gave the good news to the people;
But Herod the king, because John had made a protest on account of Herodias, his brother's wife, and other evil things which Herod had done,
Did this most evil thing of all, and had John shut up in prison.
Now it came about that when all the people had been given baptism, Jesus, having had baptism with them, was in prayer, when, the heaven being open,
The Holy Spirit came down in the form of a dove, and a voice came from heaven, saying, You are my dearly loved Son, with whom I am well pleased.
And Jesus at this time was about thirty years old, being the son (as it seemed) of Joseph, the son of Heli,
The son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph,
The son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,
The son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Josech, the son of Joda,
The son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri,
The son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmadam, the son of Er,
The son of Jesus, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi,
The son of Symeon, the son of Judas, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of Eliakim,
The son of Melea, the son of Menna, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,
The son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son of Nahshon,
The son of Amminadab, the son of Arni, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,
The son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor,
The son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah,
The son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech,
The son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan,
The son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.
And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, came back from the Jordan, and was guided by the Spirit in the waste land
For forty days, being tested by the Evil One. And he had no food in those days; and when they came to an end, he was in need of food.
And the Evil One said to him, If you are the Son of God, give orders to this stone to become bread.
And Jesus made answer to him, It has been said in the Writings, Bread is not man's only need.
And he took him up and let him see all the kingdoms of the earth in a minute of time.
And the Evil One said, I will give you authority over all these, and the glory of them, for it has been given to me, and I give it to anyone at my pleasure.
If then you will give worship to me, it will all be yours.
And Jesus in answer said to him, It has been said in the Writings, Give worship to the Lord your God, and be his servant only.
And he took him to Jerusalem and put him on the highest point of the Temple and said to him, If you are the Son of God, let yourself go down from here; for it is said in the Writings,
He will give his angels orders to take care of you:
And, In their hands they will keep you up, so that your foot may not be crushed against a stone.
And Jesus made answer and said to him, It is said in the Writings, You may not put the Lord your God to the test.
And when all these tests were ended the Evil One went away from him for a time.
And Jesus came back to Galilee in the power of the Spirit, and the news of him went through all the country round about.
And he was teaching in their Synagogues and all men gave him praise.
And he came to Nazareth, where he had been as a child, and he went, as his way was, into the Synagogue on the Sabbath, and got up to give a reading.
And the book of the prophet Isaiah was given to him and, opening the book, he came on the place where it is said,
The Spirit of the Lord is on me, because I am marked out by him to give good news to the poor; he has sent me to make well those who are broken-hearted; to say that the prisoners will be let go, and the blind will see, and to make the wounded free from their chains,
To give knowledge that the year of the Lord's good pleasure is come.
And shutting the book he gave it back to the servant and took his seat: and the eyes of all in the Synagogue were fixed on him.
Then he said to them, Today this word has come true in your hearing.
And they were all giving witness, with wonder, to the words of grace which came from his mouth: and they said, Is not this the son of Joseph?
And he said to them, Without doubt you will say to me, Let the medical man make himself well: the things which to our knowledge were done at Capernaum, do them here in your country.
And he said to them, Truly I say to you, No prophet is honoured in his country.
Truly I say to you, There were a number of widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up for three years and six months and there was no food in the land;
But Elijah was not sent to one of them, but only to Zarephath, in the land of Sidon, to a woman who was a widow.
And there were a number of lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet, and not one of them was made clean, but only Naaman the Syrian.
And all who were in the Synagogue were very angry when these things were said to them.
And they got up and took him out of the town to the edge of the mountain on which their town was, so that they might send him down to his death.
But he came through them and went on his way.
And he came down to Capernaum, a town of Galilee; and he was giving them teaching on the Sabbath.
And they were surprised at his teaching, for his word was with authority.
And there was a man in the Synagogue who had an unclean spirit; and he gave a loud cry and said,
Let us be! what have we to do with you, Jesus of Nazareth? have you come to put an end to us? I have knowledge who you are, the Holy One of God.
And Jesus said to him, Be quiet, and come out of him. And when the evil spirit had put him down on the earth in the middle of them, he came out of him, having done him no damage.
And wonder came on them all and they said to one another, What are these words? for with authority and power he gives orders to the evil spirits and they come out.
And there was much talk about him in all the places round about.
And he got up and went out of the Synagogue and went into the house of Simon. And Simon's wife's mother was very ill with a burning heat; and in answer to their prayers for her
He went near her, and with a sharp word he gave orders to the disease and it went away from her; and straight away she got up and took care of their needs.
And at sundown all those who had anyone ill with any sort of disease, took them to him, and he put his hands on every one of them and made them well.
And evil spirits came out of a number of them, crying out and saying, You are the Son of God. But he gave them sharp orders not to say a word, because they had knowledge that he was the Christ.
And when it was day, he came out and went to a waste place; and great numbers of people came looking for him, and they came to him and would have kept him from going away.
But he said to them, I have to give the good news of the kingdom of God in other towns, because that is why I was sent.
And he was teaching in the Synagogues of Galilee.
Now it came about that while the people came pushing to be near him, and to have knowledge of the word of God, he was by a wide stretch of water named Gennesaret;
And he saw two boats by the edge of the water, but the fishermen had gone out of them and were washing their nets.
And he got into one of the boats, the property of Simon, and made a request to him to go a little way out from the land. And being seated he gave the people teaching from the boat.
And when his talk was ended, he said to Simon, Go out into deep water, and let down your nets for fish.
And Simon, answering, said, Master, we were working all night and we took nothing: but at your word I will let down the nets.
And when they had done this, they got such a great number of fish that it seemed as if their nets would be broken;
And they made signs to their friends in the other boat to come to their help. And they came, and the two boats were so full that they were going down.
But Simon, when he saw it, went down at the knees of Jesus and said, Go away from me, O Lord, for I am a sinner.
For he was full of wonder and so were all those who were with him, at the number of fish which they had taken;
And so were James and John, the sons of Zebedee, who were working with Simon. And Jesus said to Simon, Have no fear; from this time forward you will be a fisher of men.
And when they had got their boats to the land, they gave up everything and went after him.
And it came about that while he was in one of the towns, there was a leper there: and when he saw Jesus he went down on his face in prayer to him, saying, Lord, if it is your pleasure, you have power to make me clean.
And he put out his hand to him and said, It is my pleasure; be clean. And straight away his disease went from him.
And he gave him orders: Say nothing to any man, but let the priest see you and give an offering so that you may be made clean, as the law of Moses says, and for a witness to them.
But news of him went out all the more, in every direction, and great numbers of people came together to give hearing to his words and to be made well from their diseases.
But he went away by himself to a waste place for prayer.
And it came about that on one of these days he was teaching; and some Pharisees and teachers of the law were seated there, who had come from every town of Galilee and Judaea and from Jerusalem; and the power of the Lord was with him, to make those who were ill free from their diseases.
And some men had with them, on a bed, a man who was ill, without power of moving; and they made attempts to get him in and put him before Jesus.
And because of the mass of people, there was no way to get him in; so they went up on the top of the house and let him down through the roof, on his bed, into the middle in front of Jesus.
And seeing their faith he said, Man, you have forgiveness for your sins.
And the scribes and Pharisees were having an argument, saying, Who is this, who has no respect for God? who is able to give forgiveness for sins, but God only?
But Jesus, who had knowledge of their thoughts, said to them, Why are you reasoning in your hearts?
Which is the simpler: to say, You have forgiveness for your sins; or to say, Get up and go?
But so that you may see that on earth the Son of man has authority for the forgiveness of sins, (he said to the man who was ill,) I say to you, Get up, and take up your bed, and go into your house.
And straight away he got up before them, and took up his bed and went away to his house giving praise to God.
And wonder overcame them all, and they gave glory to God; and they were full of fear, saying, We have seen strange things today.
And after these things he went out, and saw Levi, a tax-farmer, seated at the place where taxes were taken, and said to him, Come after me.
And giving up his business, he got up and went after him.
And Levi made a great feast for him in his house: and a great number of tax-farmers and others were seated at table with them.
And the Pharisees and their scribes made protests against his disciples, saying, Why do you take food and drink with tax-farmers and sinners?
And Jesus, answering, said to them, Those who are well have no need of a medical man, but those who are ill.
I have come, not to get the upright, but sinners, so that they may be turned from their sins.
And they said to him, The disciples of John frequently go without food, and make prayers, and so do the disciples of the Pharisees; but your disciples take food and drink.
And Jesus said, Are you able to make the friends of the newly-married man go without food when he is with them?
But the days will come when he will be taken away from them, and then they will go without food.
And he said to them, in a story, No man takes a bit of cloth from a new coat and puts it on to an old coat, for so the new coat would be damaged and the bit from the new would not go well with the old.
And no man puts new wine into old wine-skins, for fear that the skins will be burst by the new wine, and the wine be let out, and the skins come to destruction.
But new wine has to be put into new wine-skins.
And no man, having had old wine, has any desire for new, for he says, The old is better.
Now it came about that on the Sabbath he was going through the fields of grain, and his disciples took the heads of the grain for food, crushing them in their hands.
But some of the Pharisees said, Why do you do what it is not right to do on the Sabbath?
And Jesus said, Have you not seen in the Writings what David did when he was in need of food, he, and those who were with him;
How he went into the house of God and took for food the holy bread, which only the priests may take, and gave it to those who were with him?
And he said, The Son of man is lord even of the Sabbath.
And it came about, on another Sabbath, that he went into the Synagogue and was teaching there. And a man was there whose right hand was dead.
And the scribes and Pharisees were watching him to see if he would make him well on the Sabbath, so that they might be able to say something against him.
But he had knowledge of their thoughts; and he said to the man whose hand was dead, Get up and come into the middle. And he got up and came forward.
And Jesus said, I put the question to you, Is it right to do good on the Sabbath or to do evil? to give life or to take it away?
And looking round on all of them, he said to him, Put out your hand. And he did so: and his hand was made well.
But they were full of wrath, and were talking together about what they might do to Jesus.
And it came about in those days that he went out to the mountain for prayer; and he was all night in prayer to God.
And the day came and, turning to his disciples, he made a selection from among them of twelve, to whom he gave the name of Apostles;
Simon, to whom he gave the name of Peter, and Andrew, his brother, and James and John and Philip and Bartholomew
And Matthew and Thomas and James, the son of Alphaeus, and Simon, who was named the Zealot,
And Judas, the son of James, and Judas Iscariot, he who was false to him.
And he came down with them to a level place, and a great band of his disciples, and a very great number of people from all Judaea and Jerusalem and from the parts of Tyre and Sidon by the sea, came to give hearing to him, and to be made well from their diseases;
And those who were troubled with unclean spirits were made well.
And all the people were desiring to be touched by him, for power came from him and made them all well.
And turning his eyes to his disciples he said, Happy are you who are poor: for the kingdom of God is yours.
Happy are you who are in need of food now: for you will be made full. Happy are you who are weeping now; for you will be glad.
Happy are you, when men have hate for you, and put you away from among them and say angry words to you, turning away in disgust at your name, because of the Son of man.
Be glad in that day, and be lifted up for joy, for your reward in heaven will be great: for their fathers did these same things to the prophets.
But unhappy are you who have wealth: for you have been comforted now.
Unhappy are you who are full of food now: for you will be in need. Unhappy are you who are laughing now: for you will be crying in sorrow.
Unhappy are you when all men give you their approval: for so their fathers did to the false prophets.
But I say to you who give ear to me, Have love for those who are against you, do good to those who have hate for you,
Give blessing to those who give you curses, say prayers for those who are cruel to you.
If a man gives you a blow on one side of your face, then let the other side be turned to him; from him who takes away your coat, do not keep back your robe.
Give to everyone who comes with a request, and if a man takes away your property, make no attempt to get it back again.
Do to others as you would have them do to you.
If you have love for those who have love for you, what credit is it to you? for even sinners have love for those who have love for them.
And if you do good to those who do good to you, what credit is it to you? for even sinners do the same.
And if you let those have the use of your money, from whom you are hoping to get it back, what credit is it to you? even sinners do so to sinners, hoping to get back as much as they gave.
But be loving to those who are against you and do them good, and give them your money, not giving up hope, and your reward will be great and you will be the sons of the Most High: for he is kind to evil men, and to those who have hard hearts.
Be full of pity, even as your Father is full of pity.
Be not judges of others, and you will not be judged: do not give punishment to others, and you will not get punishment yourselves: make others free, and you will be made free:
Give, and it will be given to you; good measure, crushed down, full and running over, they will give to you. For in the same measure as you give, it will be given to you again.
And he gave them teaching in the form of a story, saying, Is it possible for one blind man to be guide to another? will they not go falling together into a hole?
The disciple is not greater than his master, but everyone whose learning is complete will be like his master.
And why do you take note of the grain of dust in your brother's eye, but take no note of the bit of wood which is in your eye?
How will you say to your brother, Brother, let me take the grain of dust out of your eye, when you yourself do not see the bit of wood in your eye? O false one! first take the wood out of your eye and then you will see clearly to take the dust out of your brother's eye.
For no good tree gives bad fruit, and no bad tree gives good fruit.
For every tree is judged by its fruit. Men do not get figs from thorns, or grapes from blackberry plants.
The good man, out of the good store of his heart, gives good things; and the evil man, out of his evil store, gives evil: for out of the full store of the heart come the words of the mouth.
Why do you say to me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?
Everyone who comes to me and gives ear to my words and does them, I will make clear to you what he is like:
He is like a man building a house, who went deep and put the base of it on a rock; and when the water came up and the river was driving against that house, it was not moved, because the building was good.
But he who gives hearing, without doing, is like a man building a house on the earth without a base for it; and when the force of the river came against it, straight away it came down; and the destruction of that house was great.
After he had come to the end of all his words in the hearing of the people, he went into Capernaum.
And a certain captain had a servant who was very dear to him; this servant was ill and near to death.
And when news of Jesus came to his ears, he sent to him rulers of the Jews, requesting that he would come and make his servant well.
And they, when they came to Jesus, made their request warmly, saying,
It is right for you to do this for him, because he is a friend to our nation, and himself has put up a Synagogue for us.
And Jesus went with them. And when he was not far from the house, the man sent friends to him, saying, Lord, do not give yourself trouble: for I am not important enough for you to come into my house:
And I had the feeling that I was not even good enough to come to you: but say the word only, and my servant will be well.
For I, myself, am a man under authority, having men under me; and I say to this one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my servant, Do this, and he does it.
And when these things were said to Jesus, he was surprised, and, turning to the mass of people coming after him, said, I have not seen such great faith, no, not in Israel.
And when those who were sent came back to the house they saw that the servant was well.
And it came about, after a little time, that he went to a town named Nain; and his disciples went with him, and a great number of people.
Now when he came near the door of the town, a dead man was being taken out, the only son of his mother, who was a widow: and a great number of people from the town were with her.
And when the Lord saw her, he had pity on her and said to her, Be not sad.
And he came near, and put his hand on the stretcher where the dead man was: and those who were moving it came to a stop. And he said, Young man, I say to you, Get up.
And the dead man got up, and words came from his lips. And he gave him to his mother.
And fear came on all, and they gave praise to God, saying, A great prophet is among us: and, God has given thought to his people.
And this story about him went through all Judaea and the places round about.
And the disciples of John gave him an account of all these things.
Then John sent two of his disciples to the Lord, saying, Are you he who is to come, or are we waiting for another?
And when the men came to him they said, John the Baptist has sent us to you, saying, Are you he who is to come, or are we waiting for another?
At that time, he made a number of people free from their diseases and their pains, and from evil spirits; and to others who were blind he gave back the use of their eyes.
And answering them he said, Go back and give news to John of what you have seen, and the things which have come to your ears; the blind now see, those who had no power in their legs are walking, lepers are made clean, those who had no hearing now have their ears open, dead men come to life again, and the poor have the good news given to them.
And a blessing will be on him who has no doubts about me.
And when the men who were sent by John had gone away, he said to the people, about John, What did you go out into the waste land to see? a tall stem moving in the wind?
But what did you go out to see? a man in soft clothing? See now, those who have beautiful clothing and delicate food are in kings' houses.
But what did you go out to see? a prophet? Yes, I say to you, and more than a prophet.
This is he of whom it has been said, See, I send my servant before your face, who will make ready your way before you.
I say to you, Among all the sons of women, not one is greater than John: but he who is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.
(And all the people, and the tax-farmers, to whom John had given baptism, when they had knowledge of these things, gave glory to God.
But the Pharisees and the teachers of the law were against the purpose of God for themselves, not having had his baptism.)
What comparison am I to make of the men of this generation? what are they like?
They are like children who are seated in the market-place, crying out to one another, and saying, We made music for you, but you did not take part in the dance; we gave cries of sorrow, but you were not sad.
For John the Baptist came, taking no food or drink, and you say, He has an evil spirit.
The Son of man came feasting, and you say, Here is a lover of food and wine, a friend of tax-farmers and sinners.
But wisdom is judged to be right by all her children.
And one of the Pharisees made a request that he would take a meal with him. And he went into the Pharisee's house and took his seat at the table.
And there was a woman in the town who was a sinner; and when she had news that he was a guest in the Pharisee's house, she took a bottle of perfume,
And went in and took her place at the back of him, near his feet, weeping, so that his feet were washed with the drops from her eyes, and with her hair she made them dry, and kissing his feet she put the perfume on them.
Now when the Pharisee in whose house he was saw it, he said to himself, This man, if he was a prophet, would be conscious what sort of woman this is who has put her hands on him, that she is a sinner.
And Jesus, answering, said, Simon, I have something to say to you. And he said, Master, say on.
And he said, Two men were in debt to a certain man of business: one had a debt of five hundred pence, and the other of fifty.
When they were unable to make payment, he made the two of them free of their debts. Which of them, now, will have the greater love for him?
Simon, in answer, said, It seems he whose debt was greater. And he said, Your decision is right.
And turning to the woman he said to Simon, You see this woman? I came into your house; you did not give me water for my feet: but she has been washing my feet with the drops from her eyes, and drying them with her hair.
You did not give me a kiss: but she, from the time when I came in, has gone on kissing my feet.
You put no oil on my head: but she has put perfume on my feet.
And so I say to you, She will have forgiveness for her sins which are great in number, because of her great love: but he who has small need of forgiveness gives little love.
And he said to her, You have forgiveness for your sins.
And those who were seated at table with him said to themselves, Who is this who even gives forgiveness of sins?
And he said to the woman, By your faith you have salvation; go in peace.
And it came about, after a short time, that he went through town and country giving the good news of the kingdom of God, and with him were the twelve,
And certain women who had been made free from evil spirits and diseases, Mary named Magdalene, from whom seven evil spirits had gone out,
And Joanna, the wife of Chuza, Herod's chief house-servant, and Susanna and a number of others, who gave him of their wealth for his needs.
And when a great number of people came together, and men from every town went out to him, he gave them teaching in the form of a story:
A man went out to put in seed, and while he was doing it, some was dropped by the wayside and it was crushed under foot, and was taken by the birds of heaven.
And some went on the rock, and when it came up it became dry and dead because it had no water.
And some went among thorns, and the thorns came up with it and it had no room for growth.
And some falling on good earth, came up and gave fruit a hundred times as much. And with these words he said in a loud voice, He who has ears, let him give ear.
And his disciples put questions to him about the point of the story.
And he said, To you is given knowledge of the secrets of the kingdom of God; but to the others, they are given in stories, so that seeing, they may not see, and though they give hearing, the sense will not be clear to them.
Now this is the point of the story: The seed is the word of God.
Those by the side of the road are those who have given hearing; then the Evil One comes and takes away the word from their hearts, so that they may not have faith and get salvation.
And those on the rock are those who with joy give hearing to the word; but having no root, they have faith for a time, and when the test comes they give up.
And those which went among thorns are those who have given hearing, and go on their way, but they are overcome by cares and wealth and the pleasures of life, and they give no fruit.
And those in the good earth are those who, having given ear to the word, keep it with a good and true heart, and in quiet strength give fruit.
No man, when the light is lighted, puts a cover over it, or puts it under a bed, but he puts it on its table, so that those who come in may see the light.
For nothing is put out of view which will not be made clear, and nothing is secret of which the knowledge will not come to light.
So take care how you give hearing, for to him who has will be given, and from him who has not will be taken even what he seems to have.
And his mother and his brothers came to him, and they were not able to get near him because of the great number of people.
And someone said to him, Your mother and your brothers are outside desiring to see you.
But he said to them in answer, My mother and my brothers are those who have knowledge of the word of God and do it.
Now it came about on one of those days that he got into a boat with his disciples; and he said to them, Let us go over to the other side of the water: and they put out the boat.
But while they were sailing he went to sleep: and a storm of wind came down on the sea, and the boat became full of water and they were in danger.
Then they came to him and, awaking him out of his sleep, said, Master, Master, destruction is near. And he, when he was awake, gave orders to the wind and the rolling waves, and the storm came to an end, and all was calm.
And he said to them, Where is your faith? And fear and wonder overcame them, and they said to one another, Who then is this, who gives orders even to the winds and the water and they do what he says?
And they came to the country of the Gerasenes, which is opposite Galilee.
And when he had come to the land, there came to him a certain man from the town who had evil spirits; and for a long time he had had no clothing on, and was not living in a house but in the place of the dead.
And when he saw Jesus, he gave a loud cry and went down on the earth before him and in a loud voice said, What have I to do with you, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? Do not be cruel to me.
For he gave an order to the evil spirit to come out of the man. For frequently it would take a grip of him: and he was kept under control, and prisoned with chains; but parting the chains in two, he would be sent by the driving of the evil spirit into waste places.
And Jesus said to him, What is your name? And he said, Legion; for a number of spirits had gone into him.
And they made a request to him that he would not give them an order to go away into the deep.
Now there was a great herd of pigs in that place, getting food on the mountain: and the evil spirits made a request to him that he would let them go into the pigs, and he let them.
And the evil spirits came out of the man and went into the pigs: and the herd went rushing down a sharp slope into the water and came to destruction.
And when the men who took care of them saw what had come about, they went quickly and gave news of it in the town and the country.
And they went out to see what had taken place, and they came to Jesus and saw the man out of whom the evil spirits had gone, seated, clothed and with full use of his senses, at the feet of Jesus; and fear came on them.
And those who had seen it gave them an account of how the man who had the evil spirits was made well.
And all the people of the country of the Gerasenes made a request to him to go away from them; for they were in great fear: and he got into a boat and went back.
But the man from whom the evil spirits had gone out had a great desire to be with him, but he sent him away, saying,
Go back to your house and let them have news of all the great things which God has done for you. And he went away, giving word through all the town of the great things which Jesus had done for him.
And when Jesus went back, the people were glad to see him, for they were all waiting for him.
Then there came a man named Jairus, who was a ruler in the Synagogue: and he went down at the feet of Jesus, desiring him to come to his house;
For he had an only daughter, about twelve years old, and she was near to death. But while he was on his way, the people were pushing to be near him.
And a woman, who had had a flow of blood for twelve years, and had given all her money to medical men, and not one of them was able to make her well,
Came after him and put her hand on the edge of his robe, and straight away the flowing of her blood was stopped.
And Jesus said, Who was touching me? And when they all said, It is not I, Peter and those who were with him said, Master, the people are pushing round you on every side.
But Jesus said, Someone was touching me, for I had the feeling that power had gone out from me.
And when the woman saw that she was not able to keep it secret, she came, shaking with fear, and falling down before him she made clear before all the people the reason for her touching him, and how she was made well straight away.
And he said to her, Daughter, your faith has made you well; go in peace.
While he was still talking, someone came from the house of the ruler of the Synagogue, saying, Your daughter is dead; do not go on troubling the Master.
But Jesus at these words said to him, Have no fear, only have faith, and she will be made well.
And when he came to the house he did not let any man go in with him, but only Peter and John and James, and the father of the girl and her mother.
And all the people were weeping and crying for her; but he said, Do not be sad, for she is not dead, but sleeping.
And they were laughing at him, being certain that she was dead.
But he, taking her hand, said to her, My child, get up.
And her spirit came back to her and she got up straight away: and he gave orders that food was to be given to her.
And her father and mother were full of wonder, but he gave orders to them to say nothing about it to anyone.
And getting the twelve together, he gave them power and authority over all evil spirits and over diseases, to make them well.
And he sent them out to be preachers of the kingdom of God, and to make well those who were ill.
And he said to them, Take nothing for your journey, no stick or bag or bread or money, and do not take two coats.
And if you go into a house, let that house be your resting-place till you go away.
And if any people will not take you in, when you go away from that town, put off its dust from your feet for a witness against them.
And they went away, journeying through all the towns, preaching the good news and making people free from diseases in all places.
Now Herod the king had news of all these things: and he was in doubt, because it was said by some people that John had come back from the dead;
And by some, that Elijah had come; and by others, that one of the old prophets had come back to life.
And Herod said, I put John to death: but who is this, of whom such stories are given to me? And he had a desire to see him.
And the twelve, when they came back, gave him an account of what they had done. And he took them with him and went away from the people to a town named Beth-saida.
But the people, getting news of it, went after him: and he was pleased to see them, and gave them teaching about the kingdom of God, and made those well who were in need of it.
And the day went on; and the twelve came to him and said, Send these people away so that they may go into the towns and the country round about and get resting-places and food for themselves, for we are in a waste place.
But he said, Give them food yourselves. And they said, We have only five cakes of bread and two fishes, if we do not go and get food for all these people.
For there were about five thousand men. And he said to his disciples, Make them be seated in groups, about fifty to a group.
And they did so, and made them all be seated.
And he took the five cakes of bread and the two fishes and, looking up to heaven, he said words of blessing over them, and when they had been broken, he gave them to the disciples to give to the people.
And they all took the food and had enough; and they took up of the broken bits which were over, twelve baskets full.
And it came about that when he was in prayer, by himself, and the disciples were with him, he put a question to them, saying, Who do the people say I am?
And they, answering, said, John the Baptist; but others say Elijah; and others, that one of the old prophets has come back.
And he said, But who do you say that I am? And Peter, answering, said, The Christ of God.
But he gave them special orders, not to say this to any man;
Saying, The Son of man will undergo much and be put on one side by the rulers and the chief priests and the teachers of the law, and be put to death, and on the third day he will come back to life.
And he said to them all, If any man has a desire to come after me, let him give up all, and take up his cross every day, and come after me.
For whoever has a desire to keep his life will have it taken from him, but whoever gives up his life because of me, will keep it.
For what profit will a man have if he gets all the world, but undergoes loss or destruction himself?
For if any man has a feeling of shame because of me or of my words, the Son of man will have shame because of him when he comes in his glory and the glory of the Father and of the holy angels.
But truly I say to you, Some of those who are here now will have no taste of death till they see the kingdom of God.
And about eight days after he had said these things, he took Peter and John and James with him and went up into the mountain for prayer.
And while he was in prayer, his face was changed and his clothing became white and shining.
And two men, Moses and Elijah, were talking with him;
Who were seen in glory and were talking of his death which was about to take place in Jerusalem.
Now Peter and those who were with him were overcome with sleep: but when they were fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men who were with him.
And when they were about to go away from him, Peter said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here; let us make three tents, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah: having no knowledge of what he was saying.
And while he said these things, the shade of a cloud came over them, and they were full of fear when they went into the cloud.
And there was a voice from the cloud saying, This is my Son, the man of my selection; give ear to him.
And after the voice was gone they saw that Jesus was by himself. And they kept quiet, and said nothing at that time to anyone of the things which they had seen.
And on the day after, when they came down from the mountain, a great band of people came to him.
And a man from among them, crying out, said, Master, I make a request to you, give a thought to my son, for he is my only child:
And see, a spirit takes him, and suddenly he gives a cry, twisted in pain and streaming at the lips, and when it goes away from him at last, he is marked as from blows.
And I made a request to your disciples to send it out of him, but they were not able to do it.
And Jesus said, O generation without faith and false in heart, how long will I have to be with you and put up with you? let your son come here.
And while he was coming, he was pushed violently down and twisted by the evil spirit. But Jesus gave sharp orders to the unclean spirit, and made the boy well, and gave him back to his father.
And they were full of wonder at the great power of God. But while they were all wondering at all the things which he did, he said to his disciples,
Let these words go deep into your ears, for the Son of man will be given up into the hands of men.
But this saying was not clear to them and its sense was kept secret from them so that they were not able to see it: and they had fear of questioning him about it.
Now there was a discussion among them about which of them would be the greatest.
But when Jesus saw the reasoning of their hearts, he took a small child and put him by his side,
And said to them, Whoever gives honour to this child in my name, gives honour to me: and whoever gives honour to me, gives honour to him who sent me: for whoever is least among you all, that man is great.
And John, answering, said, Master, we saw a man driving out evil spirits in your name, and we did not let him do it, because he was not one of us.
But Jesus said to him, Let him do it, for he who is not against you is for you.
And it came about that when the days were near for him to be taken up, his face was turned to go to Jerusalem,
And he sent men before: and they came to a small town of Samaria to make ready for him.
But they would not have him there, because he was clearly going to Jerusalem.
And when his disciples, James and John, saw this, they said, Lord, may we send fire from heaven and put an end to them?
But turning round he said sharp words to them.
And they went to another small town.
And when they were on the way, a certain man said to him, I will come after you wherever you go.
And Jesus said to him, Foxes have holes and the birds of the air have resting-places, but the Son of man has nowhere to put his head.
And he said to another, Come after me. But he said, Lord, let me first go and give the last honours to my father.
But he said to him, Let the dead take care of their dead; it is for you to go and give news of the kingdom of God.
And another man said, I will come with you, Lord, but first let me say a last good-day to those who are at my house.
But Jesus said, No man, having put his hand to the plough and looking back, is good enough for the kingdom of God.
From the first he was the Word, and the Word was in relation with God and was God.
This Word was from the first in relation with God.
All things came into existence through him, and without him nothing was.
What came into existence in him was life, and the life was the light of men.
And the light goes on shining in the dark; it is not overcome by the dark.
There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.
He came for witness, to give witness about the light, so that all men might have faith through him.
He himself was not the light: he was sent to give witness about the light.
The true light, which gives light to every man, was then coming into the world.
He was in the world, the world which came into being through him, but the world had no knowledge of him.
He came to the things which were his and his people did not take him to their hearts.
To all those who did so take him, however, he gave the right of becoming children of God--that is, to those who had faith in his name:
Whose birth was from God and not from blood, or from an impulse of the flesh and man's desire.
And so the Word became flesh and took a place among us for a time; and we saw his glory--such glory as is given to an only son by his father--saw it to be true and full of grace.
John gave witness about him, crying, This is he of whom I said, He who is coming after me is put over me because he was in existence before me.
From his full measure we have all been given grace on grace.
For the law was given through Moses; grace and the true way of life are ours through Jesus Christ.
No man has seen God at any time; the only Son, who is on the breast of the Father, he has made clear what God is.
And this is the witness of John when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to him with the question, Who are you?
He said quite openly and straightforwardly, I am not the Christ.
And they said to him, What then? Are you Elijah? And he said, I am not. Are you the prophet? And his answer was, I am not.
So they said to him, Who are you then? We have to give some answer to those who sent us. What have you to say about yourself?
He said, I am the voice of one crying in the waste land, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said Isaiah the prophet.
Those who had been sent came from the Pharisees.
And they put this question to him, saying, Why then are you giving baptism if you are not the Christ, or Elijah, or the prophet?
John's answer was: I give baptism with water; but there is one among you of whom you have no knowledge;
It is he who is coming after me; I am not good enough to undo his shoes.
These things took place at Bethany on the other side of the Jordan, where John was giving baptism.
The day after, John sees Jesus coming to him and says, See, here is the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world!
This is he of whom I said, One is coming after me who is put over me because he was in existence before me.
I myself had no knowledge of him, but I came giving baptism with water so that he might be seen openly by Israel.
And John gave this witness, saying, I saw the Spirit coming down from heaven like a dove and resting on him.
I had no knowledge who he was, but he who sent me to give baptism with water said to me, The one on whom you see the Spirit coming down and resting, it is he who gives baptism with the Holy Spirit.
This I saw myself and my witness is that he is the Son of God.
The day after, John was there again with two of his disciples;
And looking at Jesus while he was walking he said, See, there is the Lamb of God!
Hearing what he said, the two disciples went after Jesus.
And Jesus, turning round, saw them coming after him and said to them, What are you looking for? They said to him, Rabbi (which is to say, Master), where are you living?
+
He said to them, Come and see. They went with him then and saw where he was living; and they were with him all that day: it was then about the tenth hour of the day.
Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, was one of the two men who, hearing what John said, went after Jesus.
Early in the morning he came across his brother and said to him, We have made discovery! It is the Messiah! (which is to say, the Christ).
And he took him to Jesus. Looking at him fixedly Jesus said, You are Simon, the son of John; your name will be Cephas (which is to say, Peter).
The day after this, Jesus had a desire to go into Galilee. He came across Philip and said to him, Come and be my disciple.
Now Philip's town was Beth-saida, where Andrew and Peter came from.
Philip came across Nathanael and said to him, We have made a discovery! It is he of whom Moses, in the law, and the prophets were writing, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.
Nazareth! said Nathanael, Is it possible for any good to come out of Nazareth? Philip said to him, Come and see.
Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him and said of him, See, here is a true son of Israel in whom there is nothing false.
Nathanael said to him, Where did you get knowledge of me? In answer Jesus said, Before Philip was talking with you, while you were still under the fig-tree, I saw you.
Nathanael said to him, Rabbi, you are the Son of God, you are King of Israel!
In answer Jesus said to him, You have faith because I said to you, I saw you under the fig-tree. You will see greater things than these.
And he said to him, Truly I say to you all, You will see heaven opening and God's angels going up and coming down on the Son of man.
Truly I say to you, He who does not go through the door into the place where the sheep are kept, but gets in by some other way, is a thief and an outlaw.
He who goes in by the door is the keeper of the sheep.
The porter lets him in; and the sheep give ear to his voice; he says over the names of the sheep, and takes them out.
When he has got them all out, he goes before them, and the sheep go after him, for they have knowledge of his voice.
They will not go after another who is not their keeper, but will go from him in flight, because his voice is strange to them.
In this Jesus was teaching them in the form of a story: but what he said was not clear to them.
So Jesus said again, Truly I say to you, I am the door of the sheep.
All who came before me are thieves and outlaws: but the sheep did not give ear to them.
I am the door: if any man goes in through me he will have salvation, and will go in and go out, and will get food.
The thief comes only to take the sheep and to put them to death: he comes for their destruction: I have come so that they may have life and have it in greater measure.
I am the good keeper of sheep: the good keeper gives his life for the sheep.
He who is a servant, and not the keeper or the owner of the sheep, sees the wolf coming and goes in flight, away from the sheep; and the wolf comes down on them and sends them in all directions:
Because he is a servant he has no interest in the sheep.
I am the good keeper; I have knowledge of my sheep, and they have knowledge of me,
Even as the Father has knowledge of me and I of the Father; and I am giving my life for the sheep.
And I have other sheep which are not of this field: I will be their guide in the same way, and they will give ear to my voice, so there will be one flock and one keeper.
For this reason am I loved by the Father, because I give up my life so that I may take it again.
No one takes it away from me; I give it up of myself. I have power to give it up, and I have power to take it again. These orders I have from my Father.
There was a division again among the Jews because of these words.
And a number of them said, He has an evil spirit and is out of his mind; why do you give ear to him?
Others said, These are not the words of one who has an evil spirit. Is it possible for an evil spirit to make blind people see?
Then came the feast of the opening of the Temple in Jerusalem: it was winter;
And Jesus was walking in the Temple, in Solomon's covered way.
Then the Jews came round him, saying, how long are you going to keep us in doubt? If you are the Christ, say so clearly.
Jesus said in answer, I have said it and you have no belief: the works which I do in my Father's name, these give witness about me.
But you have no belief because you are not of my sheep.
My sheep give ear to my voice, and I have knowledge of them, and they come after me:
And I give them eternal life; they will never come to destruction, and no one will ever take them out of my hand.
That which my Father has given to me has more value than all; and no one is able to take anything out of the Father's hand.
I and my Father are one.
Then the Jews took up stones again to send at him.
Jesus said to them in answer, I have let you see a number of good works from the Father; for which of those works are you stoning me?
This was their answer: We are not stoning you for a good work but for evil words; because being a man you make yourself God.
In answer, Jesus said, Is there not a saying in your law, I said, You are gods?
If he said they were gods, to whom the word of God came (and the Writings may not be broken),
Do you say of him whom the Father made holy and sent into the world, Your words are evil; because I said, I am God's Son?
If I am not doing the works of my Father, do not have belief in me;
But if I am doing them, then have belief in the works even if you have no belief in me; so that you may see clearly and be certain that the Father is in me and I am in the Father.
Then again they made an attempt to take him; but he got away from them.
And he went again to the other side of the Jordan, to the place where John first gave baptism; and he was there for a time.
And a great number of people came to him, saying, John did no sign: but everything John said of this man was true.
And a number came to have faith in him there.
Now a certain man named Lazarus was ill; he was of Bethany, the town of Mary and her sister Martha.
(The Mary whose brother Lazarus was ill, was the Mary who put perfumed oil on the Lord and made his feet dry with her hair.)
So the sisters sent to him, saying, Lord, your dear friend is ill.
When this came to his ears, Jesus said, The end of this disease is not death, but the glory of God, so that the Son of God may have glory because of it.
Now Jesus had love in his heart for Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
So when the news came to him that Lazarus was ill, he did not go from the place where he was for two days.
Then after that time he said to his disciples, Let us go into Judaea again.
The disciples said to him, Master, the Jews were attempting only the other day to have you stoned, and are you going back there again?
Then Jesus said in answer, Are there not twelve hours in the day? A man may go about in the day without falling, because he sees the light of this world.
But if a man goes about in the night, he may have a fall because the light is not in him.
These things said he: and after that he said to them, Lazarus our friend is at rest; but I go so that I may make him come out of his sleep.
Then his disciples said to him, Lord, if he is resting he will get well.
Jesus, however, was talking of his death: but they had the idea that he was talking about taking rest in sleep.
Then Jesus said to them clearly, Lazarus is dead.
And because of you I am glad I was not there, so that you may have faith; but let us go to him.
Then Thomas, who was named Didymus, said to the other disciples, Let us go so that we may be with him in death.
Now when Jesus came, he made the discovery that Lazarus had been put into the earth four days before.
Now Bethany was near to Jerusalem, about two miles away;
And a number of Jews had come to Martha and Mary to give them comfort about their brother.
When Martha had the news that Jesus was on the way, she went out to him, but Mary did not go from the house.
Then Martha said to Jesus, Lord, if you had been here my brother would not be dead.
But I am certain that, even now, whatever request you make to God, God will give it to you.
Jesus said to her, Your brother will come to life again.
Martha said to him, I am certain that he will come to life again when all come back from the dead at the last day.
Jesus said to her, I am myself that day and that life; he who has faith in me will have life even if he is dead;
And no one who is living and has faith in me will ever see death. Is this your faith?
She said to him, Yes, Lord: my faith is that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who was to come into the world.
And having said this, she went away and said secretly to her sister Mary, The Master is here and has sent for you.
And Mary, hearing this, got up quickly and went to him.
Now Jesus had not at this time come into the town, but was still in the place where Martha had seen him.
Then the Jews who were with her in the house, comforting her, when they saw Mary get up quickly and go out, went after her in the belief that she was going to the place of the dead and would be weeping there.
When Mary came to where Jesus was and saw him, she went down at his feet, saying, Lord, if you had been here my brother would not be dead.
And when Jesus saw her weeping, and saw the Jews weeping who came with her, his spirit was moved and he was troubled,
And said, Where have you put him? They said, Come and see, Lord.
And Jesus himself was weeping.
So the Jews said, See how dear he was to him!
But some of them said, This man, who made open the eyes of the blind man, was he not able to keep his friend from death?
So Jesus, deeply troubled in heart, came to the place of the dead. It was a hole in the rock, and a stone was over the opening.
Jesus said, Take away the stone. Martha, the sister of him who was dead, said, Lord, by this time the body will be smelling, for he has been dead four days.
Jesus said to her, Did I not say to you that if you had faith you would see the glory of God?
So they took away the stone. And Jesus, looking up to heaven, said, Father, I give praise to you for hearing me.
I was certain that your ears are at all times open to me, but I said it because of these who are here, so that they may see that you sent me.
Then he said in a loud voice, Lazarus, come out!
And he who was dead came out, with linen bands folded tightly about his hands and feet, and a cloth about his face. Jesus said to them, Make him free and let him go.
Then a number of the Jews who had come to Mary and had seen the things which Jesus did had belief in him.
But some of them went to the Pharisees with the news of what Jesus had done.
Then the high priests and the Pharisees had a meeting and said, What are we doing? This man is doing a number of signs.
If we let him go on in this way, everybody will have belief in him and the Romans will come and take away our place and our nation.
But one of them, Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, said to them, You have no knowledge of anything;
You do not see that it is in your interest for one man to be put to death for the people, so that all the nation may not come to destruction.
He did not say this of himself, but being the high priest that year he said, as a prophet, that Jesus would be put to death for the nation;
And not for that nation only, but for the purpose of uniting in one body the children of God all over the world.
And from that day they took thought together how to put him to death.
So Jesus no longer went about publicly among the Jews, but went from there into the country near to the waste land, to a town named Ephraim, where he was for some time with the disciples.
Now the Passover of the Jews was near, and numbers of people went up from the country to Jerusalem to make themselves clean before the Passover.
They were looking for Jesus and saying to one another while they were in the Temple, What is your opinion? Will he not come to the feast?
Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders that if anyone had knowledge where he was, he was to give them word, so that they might take him.
Then, six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany where Lazarus was, whom Jesus had made to come back from the dead.
So they made him a meal there, and he was waited on by Martha, and Lazarus was among those who were seated with him at table.
Then Mary, taking a pound of perfumed oil of great value, put it on the feet of Jesus and made them dry with her hair: and the house became full of the smell of the perfume.
But one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot (who was to give him up), said,
Why was not this perfume traded for three hundred pence, and the money given to the poor?
(He said this, not because he had any love for the poor; but because he was a thief, and, having the money-bag, took for himself what was put into it.)
Then Jesus said, Let her be. Let her keep what she has for the day of my death.
The poor you have ever with you, but me you have not for ever.
Then a great number of the Jews had news that he was there: and they came, not only because of Jesus, but so that they might see Lazarus who had been dead and to whom he had given life.
Now there was talk among the chief priests of putting Lazarus to death;
For because of him a great number of the Jews went away and had belief in Jesus.
The day after, a great number of people who were there for the feast, when they had the news that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,
Took branches of palm-trees and went out to him, crying, A blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel!
And Jesus saw a young ass and took his seat on it; as the Writings say,
Have no fear, daughter of Zion: see your King is coming, seated on a young ass.
(These things were not clear to his disciples at first: but when Jesus had been lifted up into his glory, then it came to their minds that these things in the Writings were about him and that they had been done to him.)
Now the people who were with him when his voice came to Lazarus in the place of the dead, and gave him life again, had been talking about it.
And that was the reason the people went out to him, because it had come to their ears that he had done this sign.
Then the Pharisees said one to another, You see, you are unable to do anything: the world has gone after him.
Now there were some Greeks among the people who had come up to give worship at the feast:
They came to Philip, who was of Beth-saida in Galilee, and made a request, saying, Sir, we have a desire to see Jesus.
Philip went and gave word of it to Andrew; and Andrew went with Philip to Jesus.
And Jesus said to them in answer, The hour of the glory of the Son of man has come.
Truly I say to you, If a seed of grain does not go into the earth and come to an end, it is still a seed and no more; but through its death it gives much fruit.
He who is in love with life will have it taken from him; and he who has no care for his life in this world will keep it for ever and ever.
If any man is my servant, let him come after me; and where I am, there will my servant be. If any man becomes my servant, my Father will give him honour.
Now is my soul troubled; and what am I to say? Father, keep me from this hour. No: for this purpose have I come to this hour.
Father, give glory to your name. Then there came a voice out of heaven, saying, I have given it glory, and I will give it glory again.
Hearing the sound, a number of people who were there said that it was thunder: others said, An angel was talking to him.
Jesus said in answer, This voice came not for me but for you.
Now is this world to be judged: now will the ruler of this world be sent out.
And I, if I am lifted up from the earth, will make all men come to me.
(This he said, pointing to the sort of death he would have.)
Then the people in answer said to him, The law says that the Christ will have life without end: how say you then that it is necessary for the Son of man to be lifted up? Who is this Son of man?
Jesus said to them, For a little time longer the light will be among you; while you have the light go on walking in it, so that the dark may not overtake you: one walking in the dark has no knowledge of where he is going.
In so far as you have the light, put your faith in the light so that you may become sons of light. With these words Jesus went away and for a time was not seen again by them.
But though he had done such a number of signs before them, they still had no belief in him:
So that the words of the prophet Isaiah might come true, when he said, Lord, who has any belief in our preaching? and the arm of the Lord, to whom has it been unveiled?
For this reason they were unable to have belief, because Isaiah said again,
He has made their eyes blind, and their hearts hard; for fear that they might see with their eyes and get knowledge with their hearts, and be changed, and I might make them well.
(Isaiah said these words because he saw his glory. His words were about him.)
However, a number even of the rulers had belief in him, but because of the Pharisees they did not say so openly for fear that they might be shut out from the Synagogue:
For the praise of men was dearer to them than the approval of God.
Then Jesus said with a loud voice, He who has faith in me, has faith not in me, but in him who sent me.
And he who sees me, sees him who sent me.
I have come as a light into the world, so that no one who has faith in me will go on living in the dark.
And if any man gives ear to my words and does not keep them, I am not his judge: I did not come to be judge of the world but to give salvation to the world.
He who puts me on one side and does not take my words to heart, is not without a judge: the word which I have said will be his judge on the last day.
For I have not said it on my authority, but the Father who sent me gave me orders what to say and how to say it.
And I have knowledge that his order is eternal life: so that the things which I say, I say them even as the Father says them to me.
Now before the feast of the Passover, it was clear to Jesus that the time had come for him to go away from this world to the Father. Having once had love for those in the world who were his, his love for them went on to the end.
So while a meal was going on, the Evil One having now put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to be false to him,
Jesus, being conscious that the Father had put everything into his hands, and that he came from God and was going to God,
Got up from table, put off his robe and took a cloth and put it round him.
Then he put water into a basin and was washing the feet of the disciples and drying them with the cloth which was round him.
So he came to Simon Peter. Peter said, Lord, are my feet to be washed by you?
And Jesus, answering, said to him, What I do is not clear to you now, but it will be clear to you in time to come.
Peter said, I will never let my feet be washed by you, never. Jesus said in answer, If I do not make you clean you have no part with me.
Simon Peter said to him, Lord, not my feet only, but my hands and my head.
Jesus said to him, He who is bathed has need only to have his feet washed and then he is clean all over: and you, my disciples, are clean, but not all of you.
(He had knowledge who was false to him; that is why he said, You are not all clean.)
Then, after washing their feet and putting on his robe again, he took his seat and said to them, Do you see what I have done to you?
You give me the name of Master and Lord: and you are right; that is what I am.
If then I, the Lord and the Master, have made your feet clean, it is right for you to make one another's feet clean.
I have given you an example, so that you may do what I have done to you.
Truly I say to you, A servant is not greater than his lord; and he who is sent is not greater than the one who sent him.
If these things are clear to you, happy are you if you do them.
I am not talking of you all: I have knowledge of my true disciples, but things are as they are, so that the Writings may come true, The foot of him who takes bread with me is lifted up against me.
From this time forward, I give you knowledge of things before they come about, so that when they come about you may have belief that I am he.
Truly I say to you, He who takes to his heart anyone whom I send, takes me to his heart; and he who so takes me, takes him who sent me.
When Jesus had said this he was troubled in spirit, and gave witness, saying, Truly I say to you, that one of you will be false to me.
Then the eyes of the disciples were turned on one another, in doubt as to whom he had in mind.
There was at table one of his disciples, the one dear to Jesus, resting his head on Jesus' breast.
Making a sign to him, Simon Peter said, Who is it he is talking about?
He, then, resting his head on Jesus' breast, said to him, Lord, who is it?
This was the answer Jesus gave: It is the one to whom I will give this bit of bread after I have put it in the vessel. Then he took the bit of bread, put it into the vessel, and gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot.
And when Judas took the bread Satan went into him. Then Jesus said to him, Do quickly what you have to do.
Now it was not clear to anyone at table why he said this to him.
Some were of the opinion that because Judas kept the money-bag Jesus said to him, Get the things we have need of for the feast; or, that he was to give something to the poor.
So Judas, having taken the bit of bread, straight away went out: and it was night.
Then when he had gone out, Jesus said, Now is glory given to the Son of man, and God is given glory in him.
If God is given glory in him, God will give him glory in himself, and will give him glory even now.
My dear children, I am only to be with you a little longer. Then you will be looking for me: and as I said to the Jews, so now I say to you, Where I am going you may not come.
I give you a new law: Have love one for another; even as I have had love for you, so are you to have love one for another.
By this it will be clear to all men that you are my disciples, if you have love one for another.
Simon Peter said to him, Lord, where are you going? Jesus said in answer, Where I am going you may not come with me now, but you will come later.
Peter said to him, Why may I not come with you even now? I will give up my life for you.
Jesus said in answer, Will you give up your life for me? Truly I say to you, Before the cry of the cock you will have said three times that you are not my disciple.
Let not your heart be troubled: have faith in God and have faith in me.
In my Father's house are rooms enough; if it was not so, would I have said that I am going to make ready a place for you?
And if I go and make ready a place for you, I will come back again and will take you to be with me, so that you may be where I am.
And you all have knowledge of where I am going, and of the way to it.
Thomas said, Lord, we have no knowledge of where you are going; how may we have knowledge of the way?
Jesus said to him, I am the true and living way: no one comes to the Father but by me.
If you had knowledge of me, you would have knowledge of my Father: you have knowledge of him now and have seen him.
Philip said to him, Lord, let us see the Father, and we have need of nothing more.
Jesus said to him, Philip, have I been with you all this time, and still you have no knowledge of me? He who has seen me has seen the Father. Why do you say, Let us see the Father?
Have you not faith that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words which I say to you, I say not from myself: but the Father who is in me all the time does his works.
Have faith that I am in the Father and that the Father is in me: at least, have faith in me because of what I do.
Truly I say to you, He who puts his faith in me will do the very works which I do, and he will do greater things than these, because I am going to my Father.
And whatever request you make in my name, that I will do, so that the Father may have glory in the Son.
If you make any request to me in my name, I will do it.
If you have love for me, you will keep my laws.
And I will make prayer to the Father and he will give you another Helper to be with you for ever,
Even the Spirit of true knowledge. That Spirit the world is not able to take to its heart because it sees him not and has no knowledge of him: but you have knowledge of him, because he is ever with you and will be in you.
I will not let you be without a friend: I am coming to you.
A little time longer, and the world will see me no more; but you will see me; and you will be living because I am living.
At that time it will be clear to you that I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I in you.
He who has my laws and keeps them, he it is who has love for me: and he who has love for me will be loved by my Father, and I will have love for him and will let myself be seen clearly by him.
Judas (not Iscariot) said to him, How is it that you will let yourself be seen clearly by us and not by the world?
Jesus said to him in answer, If anyone has love for me, he will keep my words: and he will be dear to my Father; and we will come to him and make our living-place with him.
He who has no love for me does not keep my words; and the word which you are hearing is not my word but the Father's who sent me.
I have said all this to you while I am still with you.
But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will be your teacher in all things and will put you in mind of everything I have said to you.
May peace be with you; my peace I give to you: I give it not as the world gives. Let not your heart be troubled; let it be without fear.
Keep in mind how I said to you, I go away and come to you again. If you had love for me you would be glad, because I am going to the Father: for the Father is greater than I.
And now I have given you word of it before it comes, so that, when it comes, you may have faith.
After this I will not say much to you, because the ruler of this world comes: and he has no power over me;
But he comes so that the world may see that I have love for the Father, and that I am doing as I am ordered by the Father. Get up, and let us go.
I am the true vine and my Father is the gardener.
He takes away every branch in me which has no fruit, and every branch which has fruit he makes clean, so that it may have more fruit.
You are clean, even now, through the teaching which I have given you.
Be in me at all times as I am in you. As the branch is not able to give fruit of itself, if it is not still on the vine, so you are not able to do so if you are not in me.
I am the vine, you are the branches: he who is in me at all times as I am in him, gives much fruit, because without me you are able to do nothing.
If a man does not keep himself in me, he becomes dead and is cut off like a dry branch; such branches are taken up and put in the fire and burned.
If you are in me at all times, and my words are in you, then anything for which you make a request will be done for you.
Here is my Father's glory, in that you give much fruit and so are my true disciples.
Even as the Father has given me his love, so I have given my love to you: be ever in my love.
If you keep my laws, you will be ever in my love, even as I have kept my Father's laws, and am ever in his love.
I have said these things to you so that I may have joy in you and so that your joy may be complete.
This is the law I give you: Have love one for another, even as I have love for you.
Greater love has no man than this, that a man gives up his life for his friends.
You are my friends, if you do what I give you orders to do.
No longer do I give you the name of servants; because a servant is without knowledge of what his master is doing: I give you the name of friends, because I have given you knowledge of all the things which my Father has said to me.
You did not take me for yourselves, but I took you for myself; and I gave you the work of going about and producing fruit which will be for ever; so that whatever request you make to the Father in my name he may give it to you.
So this is my law for you: Have love one for another.
If you are hated by the world, keep in mind that I was hated by the world before you.
If you were of the world, you would be loved by the world: but because you are not of the world, but I have taken you out of the world, you are hated by the world.
Keep in mind the words I said to you, A servant is not greater than his lord. If they were cruel to me, they will be cruel to you; if they kept my words, they will keep yours.
They will do all this to you because of my name--because they have no knowledge of him who sent me.
If I had not come and been their teacher they would have had no sin: but now they have no reason to give for their sin.
He who has hate for me has hate for my Father.
If I had not done among them the works which no other man ever did, they would have had no sin: but now they have seen, and they have had hate in their hearts for me and my Father.
This comes about so that the writing in their law may be made true, Their hate for me was without cause.
When the Helper comes, whom I will send to you from the Father even the Spirit of true knowledge who comes from the Father--he will give witness about me;
And you, in addition, will give witness because you have been with me from the first.
I have said these things to you so that you may not be in doubt.
They will put you out of the Synagogues: yes, the time is coming when whoever puts you to death will have the belief that he is doing God's pleasure.
They will do these things to you because they have not had knowledge of the Father or of me.
I have said these things to you so that when the time comes, what I have said may come to your mind. I did not say them to you at the first, because then I was still with you.
But now I am going to him who sent me; and not one of you says to me, Where are you going?
But your hearts are full of sorrow because I have said these things.
But what I am saying is true: my going is for your good: for if I do not go away, the Helper will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you.
And he, when he comes, will make the world conscious of sin, and of righteousness, and of being judged:
Of sin, because they have not faith in me;
Of righteousness, because I go to the Father and you will see me no more;
Of being judged, because the ruler of this world has been judged.
I have still much to say to you, but you are not strong enough for it now.
However, when he, the Spirit of true knowledge, has come, he will be your guide into all true knowledge: for his words will not come from himself, but whatever has come to his hearing, that he will say: and he will make clear to you the things to come.
He will give me glory, because he will take of what is mine, and make it clear to you.
Everything which the Father has is mine: that is why I say, He will take of what is mine and will make it clear to you.
After a little time you will see me no longer; and then again, after a little time, you will see me.
So some of the disciples said one to another, What is this he is saying, After a little time, you will see me no longer; and then again, after a little time, you will see me? and, I am going to the Father?
So they said again and again, What is this he is saying, A little time? His words are not clear to us.
Jesus saw that they had a desire to put the question to him, so he said to them, Is this what you are questioning one with another, why I said, After a little time, you will see me no longer; and then again, after a little time, you will see me?
Truly I say to you, You will be weeping and sorrowing, but the world will be glad: you will be sad, but your sorrow will be turned into joy.
When a woman is about to give birth she has sorrow, because her hour is come; but when she has given birth to the child, the pain is put out of her mind by the joy that a man has come into the world.
So you have sorrow now: but I will see you again, and your hearts will be glad, and no one will take away your joy.
And on that day you will put no questions to me. Truly I say to you, Whatever request you make to the Father, he will give it to you in my name.
Up to now you have made no request in my name: do so, and it will be answered, so that your hearts may be full of joy.
All this I have said to you in veiled language: but the time is coming when I will no longer say things in veiled language but will give you knowledge of the Father clearly.
In that day you will make requests in my name: and I do not say that I will make prayer to the Father for you,
For the Father himself gives his love to you, because you have given your love to me and have had faith that I came from God.
I came out from the Father and have come into the world: again, I go away from the world and go to the Father.
His disciples said, Now you are talking clearly and not in veiled language.
Now we are certain that you have knowledge of all things and have no need for anyone to put questions to you: through this we have faith that you came from God.
Jesus made answer, Have you faith now?
See, a time is coming, yes, it is now here, when you will go away in all directions, every man to his house, and I will be by myself: but I am not by myself, because the Father is with me.
I have said all these things to you so that in me you may have peace. In the world you have trouble: but take heart! I have overcome the world.
Jesus said these things; then, lifting his eyes to heaven, he said, Father, the time has now come; give glory to your Son, so that the Son may give glory to you:
Even as you gave him authority over all flesh, to give eternal life to all those whom you have given to him.
And this is eternal life: to have knowledge of you, the only true God, and of him whom you have sent, even Jesus Christ.
I have given you glory on the earth, having done all the work which you gave me to do.
And now, Father, let me have glory with you, even that glory which I had with you before the world was.
I have given knowledge of your name to the men whom you gave me out of the world: yours they were, and you gave them to me, and they have kept your words.
Now it is clear to them that whatever you have given to me comes from you:
Because I have given them the words which you gave to me; and they have taken them to heart, and have certain knowledge that I came from you, and they have faith that you sent me.
My prayer is for them: my prayer is not for the world, but for those whom you have given to me, because they are yours
(All mine are yours, and yours are mine) and I have glory in them.
And now I will be no longer in the world, but they are in the world and I come to you. Holy Father, keep them in your name which you have given to me, so that they may be one even as we are one.
While I was with them I kept them safe in your name which you have given to me: I took care of them and not one of them has come to destruction, but only the son of destruction, so that the Writings might come true.
And now I come to you; and these things I say in the world so that they may have my joy complete in them.
I have given your word to them; and they are hated by the world, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
My prayer is not that you will take them out of the world, but that you will keep them from the Evil One.
They are not of the world any more than I am of the world.
Make them holy by the true word: your word is the true word.
Even as you have sent me into the world, so I have sent them into the world.
And for them I make myself holy, so that they may be made truly holy.
My prayer is not for them only, but for all who will have faith in me through their word;
May they all be one! Even as you, Father, are in me and I am in you, so let them be in us, so that all men may come to have faith that you sent me.
And the glory which you have given to me I have given to them, so that they may be one even as we are one;
I in them, and you in me, so that they may be made completely one, and so that it may become clear to all men that you have sent me and that they are loved by you as I am loved by you.
Father, it is my desire that these whom you have given to me may be by my side where I am, so that they may see my glory which you have given to me, because you had love for me before the world came into being.
Father of righteousness, I have knowledge of you, though the world has not; and to these it is clear that you sent me;
And I have given to them knowledge of your name, and will give it, so that the love which you have for me may be in them and I in them.
When Jesus had said these words he went out with his disciples over the stream Kedron to a garden, into which he went with his disciples.
And Judas, who was false to him, had knowledge of the place because Jesus went there frequently with his disciples.
So Judas, getting a band of armed men and police from the chief priests and Pharisees, went there with lights and with arms.
Then Jesus, having knowledge of everything which was coming on him, went forward and said to them, Who are you looking for?
Their answer was, Jesus the Nazarene. Jesus said, I am he. And Judas, who was false to him, was there at their side.
And when he said to them, I am he, they went back, falling to the earth.
So again he put the question to them, Who are you looking for? And they said, Jesus the Nazarene.
Jesus made answer, I have said that I am he; if you are looking for me, let these men go away.
(He said this so that his words might come true, I have kept safe all those whom you gave to me.)
Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, took it out and gave the high priest's servant a blow, cutting off his right ear. The servant's name was Malchus.
Then Jesus said to Peter, Put back your sword: am I not to take the cup which my Father has given to me?
Then the band and the chief captain and the police took Jesus and put cords round him.
They took him first to Annas, because Annas was the father-in-law of Caiaphas who was the high priest that year.
It was Caiaphas who had said to the Jews that it was in their interest for one man to be put to death for the people.
And Simon Peter went after Jesus with another disciple. Now that disciple was a friend of the high priest and he went in with Jesus into the house of the high priest;
But Peter was kept outside at the door. Then this other disciple, who was a friend of the high priest, came out and had a word with the girl who kept the door, and took Peter in.
Then the girl who was the door-keeper said to Peter, Are you not one of this man's disciples? In answer he said, I am not.
Now the servants and the police had made a fire of coals because it was cold; they were warming themselves in front of it and Peter was there with them, warming himself.
Then the high priest put questions to Jesus about his disciples and his teaching.
Jesus made answer, I said things openly to the world at all times; I have given my teaching in the Synagogues and in the Temple to which all the Jews come; and I have said nothing secretly.
Why are you questioning me? put questions to my hearers about what I have said to them: they have knowledge of what I said.
When he said this, one of the police by his side gave him a blow with his open hand, saying, Do you give such an answer to the high priest?
Jesus said in answer, If I have said anything evil, give witness to the evil: but if I said what is true, why do you give me blows?
Then Annas sent him chained to Caiaphas, the high priest.
But Simon Peter was still there warming himself by the fire. They said to him, Are you not one of his disciples? He said, No, I am not.
One of the servants of the high priest, a relation of him whose ear had been cut off by Peter, said, Did I not see you with him in the garden?
Then again Peter said, No. And straight away a cock gave its cry.
So they took Jesus from the house of Caiaphas to the Praetorium. It was early. They themselves did not go into the Praetorium, so that they might not become unclean, but might take the Passover.
So Pilate came out to them and put the question: What have you to say against this man?
They said to him in answer, If the man was not a wrongdoer we would not have given him up to you.
Then Pilate said to them, Take him yourselves and let him be judged by your law. But the Jews said to him, We have no right to put any man to death.
(That the word of Jesus might come true, pointing to the sort of death he would have.)
Then Pilate went back into the Praetorium and sent for Jesus and said to him, Are you the King of the Jews?
Jesus made answer, Do you say this of yourself, or did others say it about me?
Pilate said, Am I a Jew? Your nation and the chief priests have given you into my hands: what have you done?
Jesus said in answer, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom was of this world, my disciples would have made a good fight to keep me out of the hands of the Jews: but my kingdom is not here.
Then Pilate said to him, Are you then a king? Jesus made answer, You say that I am a king. For this purpose was I given birth, and for this purpose I came into the world, that I might give witness to what is true. Every lover of what is true gives ear to my voice.
Pilate said to him, True? what is true? Having said this he went out again to the Jews and said to them, I see no wrong in him.
But every year you make a request to me to let a prisoner go free at the Passover. Is it your desire that I let the King of the Jews go free?
Then again they gave a loud cry, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was an outlaw.
Then Pilate took Jesus and had him whipped with cords.
And the men of the army made a crown of thorns and put it on his head, and they put a purple robe on him.
And they kept coming and saying, Long life to the King of the Jews! And they gave him blows with their hands.
And Pilate went out again and said to them, See, I let him come out to you to make it clear to you that I see no wrong in him.
Then Jesus came out with the crown of thorns and the purple robe. And Pilate said to them, Here is the man!
So when the chief priests and the police saw him they gave a loud cry, To the cross! to the cross! Pilate said to them, Take him yourselves and put him on the cross: I see no crime in him.
And the Jews made answer, We have a law, and by that law it is right for him to be put to death because he said he was the Son of God.
When this saying came to Pilate's ears his fear became greater;
And he went again into the Praetorium and said to Jesus, Where do you come from? But Jesus gave him no answer.
Then Pilate said to him, You say nothing to me? is it not clear to you that I have power to let you go free and power to put you to death on the cross?
Jesus gave this answer: You would have no power at all over me if it was not given to you by God; so that he who gave me up to you has the greater sin.
Hearing this, Pilate had a desire to let him go free, but the Jews said in a loud voice, If you let this man go, you are not Caesar's friend: everyone who makes himself a king goes against Caesar.
So when these words came to Pilate's ear, he took Jesus out, seating himself in the judge's seat in a place named in Hebrew, Gabbatha, or the Stone Floor.
(It was the day when they made ready for the Passover; and it was about the sixth hour.) And he said to the Jews, There is your King!
Then they gave a loud cry, Away with him! away with him! to the cross! Pilate said to them, Am I to put your King to death on the cross? The chief priests said in answer, We have no king but Caesar.
So then he gave him up to them to be put to death on the cross. And they took Jesus away;
And he went out with his cross on him to the place which is named Dead Man's Head (in Hebrew, Golgotha):
Where they put him on the cross with two others, one on this side and one on that, and Jesus in the middle.
And Pilate put on the cross a statement in writing. The writing was: JESUS THE NAZARENE, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
The writing was seen by a number of the Jews, for the place where Jesus was put to death on the cross was near the town; and the writing was in Hebrew and Latin and Greek.
Then the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, Do not put, The King of the Jews, but, He said, I am the King of the Jews.
But Pilate made answer, What I have put in writing will not be changed.
And when Jesus was nailed to the cross, the men of the army took his clothing, and made a division of it into four parts, to every man a part, and they took his coat: now the coat was without a join, made out of one bit of cloth.
So they said among themselves, Let this not be cut up, but let us put it to the decision of chance and see who gets it. (They did this so that the Writings might come true, which say, They made a distribution of my clothing among them, and my coat they put to the decision of chance.) This was what the men of the army did.
Now by the side of the cross of Jesus were his mother, and his mother's sister Mary, the wife of Cleopas, and Mary Magdalene.
So when Jesus saw his mother and the disciple who was dear to him, he said to his mother, Mother, there is your son!
Then he said to the disciple, There is your mother! And from that hour the disciple took her to his house.
After this, being conscious that all things had now been done so that the Writings might come true, Jesus said, Give me water.
Now there was a vessel ready, full of bitter wine, and they put a sponge full of it on a stick and put it to his mouth.
So when Jesus had taken the wine he said, All is done. And with his head bent he gave up his spirit.
Now it was the day of getting ready for the Passover, and so that the bodies might not be on the cross on the Sabbath (because the day of that Sabbath was a great day), the Jews made a request to Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away.
So the men of the army came, and the legs of the first were broken and then of the other who was put to death on the cross with Jesus:
But when they came to Jesus, they saw that he was dead by this time, and so his legs were not broken;
But one of the men made a wound in his side with a spear, and straight away there came out blood and water.
And he who saw it has given witness (and his witness is true; he is certain that what he says is true) so that you may have belief.
These things came about so that the Writings might be true, No bone of his body will be broken.
And again another verse says, They will see him who was wounded by their spears.
After these things, Joseph of Arimathaea, who was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, made a request to Pilate to let him take away the body of Jesus: and Pilate said he might do so. So he went and took away his body.
And Nicodemus came (he who had first come to Jesus by night) with a roll of myrrh and aloes mixed, about a hundred pounds.
Then they took the body of Jesus, folding linen about it with the spices, as is the way of the Jews when they put the dead to rest.
Now there was a garden near the cross, and in the garden a new place for the dead in which no man had ever been put.
So they put Jesus there, because it was the Jews' day of getting ready for the Passover, and the place was near.
On the third day two people were going to be married at Cana in Galilee. The mother of Jesus was there:
And Jesus with his disciples came as guests.
When they had not enough wine, the mother of Jesus said to him, They have no wine.
Jesus said to her, Woman, this is not your business; my time is still to come.
His mother said to the servants, Whatever he says to you, do it.
Now six pots of stone, every one taking two or three firkins of water, were placed there for the purpose of washing, as is the way of the Jews.
Jesus said to the servants, Make the pots full of water. And they made them full to the top.
Then he said to them, Now take some, and give it to the master of the feast. So they took it to him.
After tasting the water which had now become wine, the master of the feast (having no idea where it came from, though it was clear to the servants who took the water out) sent for the newly-married man,
And said to him, Every man first puts out his best wine and when all have had enough he puts out what is not so good; but you have kept the good wine till now.
This, the first of his signs, Jesus did at Cana in Galilee and let his glory be seen openly; and his disciples put their faith in him.
After this he went down to Capernaum, with his mother, his brothers, and his disciples, and they were there not more than two or three days.
The time of the Passover of the Jews was near and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
And there in the Temple he saw men trading in oxen and sheep and doves, and he saw the changers of money in their seats:
And he made a whip of small cords and put them all out of the Temple, with the sheep and the oxen, sending in all directions the small money of the changers and overturning their tables;
And to those who were trading in doves he said, Take these things away; do not make my Father's house a market.
And it came to the minds of the disciples that the Writings say, I am on fire with passion for your house.
Then the Jews put this question to him: What sign of authority have you to give us, seeing that you do these things?
And Jesus said to them, Send destruction on this Temple and I will put it up again in three days.
The Jews said, The building of this Temple took forty-six years; and you will put it up in three days!
But his words were about that holy building which was his body.
So when he had come back again from the dead, the memory of these words came back to the disciples, and they had faith in the holy Writings and in the word which Jesus had said.
Now while he was in Jerusalem at the feast of the Passover, a great number of people came to have faith in his name, after seeing the signs which he did.
But Jesus did not have faith in them, because he had knowledge of them all.
He had no need for any witness about man; for he himself had knowledge of what was in man.
Now on the first day of the week, very early, while it was still dark, Mary Magdalene came to the place and saw that the stone had been taken away from it.
Then she went running to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple who was loved by Jesus, and said to them, They have taken away the Lord out of the place of the dead and we have no knowledge where they have put him.
So Peter and the other disciple went out to the place of the dead.
They went running together, and the other disciple got in front of Peter and came first to the hole in the rock;
And looking in, he saw the linen bands on the earth; but he did not go in,
Then Simon Peter came after him and went into the hole in the rock; and he saw the linen bands on the earth,
And the cloth, which had been round his head, not with the linen bands but rolled up in a place by itself.
Then the other disciple who came there first went in; and he saw and belief came to him.
For at that time they had no knowledge that the Writings said that he would have to come again from the dead.
So then the disciples went away again to their houses.
But Mary was still there outside the hole in the rock, weeping; and while she was weeping and looking into the hole,
She saw two angels in white seated where the body of Jesus had been, one at the head and the other at the feet.
They said to her, Woman, why are you weeping? She said to them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I have no knowledge where they have put him.
And then looking round, she saw Jesus there, but had no idea that it was Jesus.
Jesus said to her, Woman, why are you weeping? who are you looking for? She, taking him for the gardener, said to him, Sir, if you have taken him away from here, say where you have put him and I will take him away.
Jesus said to her, Mary! Turning, she said to him in Hebrew, Rabboni! (which is to say, Master).
Jesus said to her, Do not put your hand on me, for I have not gone up to the Father: but go to my brothers and say to them, I go up to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.
Mary Magdalene went with the news to the disciples, and said she had seen the Lord and that he had said these things to her.
At evening on that day, the first day of the week, when, for fear of the Jews, the doors were shut where the disciples were, Jesus came among them and said to them, May peace be with you!
And when he had said this, he let them see his hands and his side. Then the disciples were glad when they saw the Lord.
And Jesus said to them again, May peace be with you! As the Father sent me, even so I now send you.
And when he had said this, breathing on them, he said to them, Let the Holy Spirit come on you:
Any to whom you give forgiveness, will be made free from their sins; and any from whom you keep back forgiveness, will still be in their sins.
Now Thomas, one of the twelve, named Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.
So the other disciples said to him, We have seen the Lord. But he said to them, If I do not see in his hands the print of the nails and put my finger into the print of the nails, and if I do not put my hand into his side, I will never have belief.
And after eight days, his disciples were again in the house and Thomas was with them. Though the doors were shut, Jesus came, and taking his place in the middle of them, he said, May peace be with you!
Then he said to Thomas, Put out your finger, and see my hands; and put your hand here into my side: and be no longer in doubt but have belief.
And Thomas said in answer, My Lord and my God!
Jesus said to him, Because you have seen me you have belief: a blessing will be on those who have belief though they have not seen me!
A number of other signs Jesus did before his disciples which are not recorded in this book:
But these are recorded, so that you may have faith that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and so that, having this faith you may have life in his name.
After these things Jesus let himself be seen again by the disciples at the sea of Tiberias; and it came about in this way.
Simon Peter, Thomas named Didymus, Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples were all together.
Simon Peter said to them, I am going fishing. They said to him, And we will come with you. They went out and got into the boat; but that night they took no fish.
Now very early in the morning Jesus was there by the edge of the sea (though the disciples were not conscious that it was Jesus).
So Jesus said to them, Children, have you taken any fish? They made answer, No.
And he said to them, Let down the net on the right side of the boat and you will get some. So they put it in the water and now they were not able to get it up again because of the great number of fish.
So the disciple who was dear to Jesus said to Peter, It is the Lord! Hearing that it was the Lord, Peter put his coat round him (because he was not clothed) and went into the sea.
And the other disciples came in the little boat (they were not far from land, only about two hundred cubits off) pulling the net full of fish.
When they got to land, they saw a fire of coals there, with fish cooking on it, and bread.
Jesus said to them, Get some of the fish which you have now taken.
So Peter went to the boat and came back pulling the net to land, full of great fish, a hundred and fifty-three; and though there was such a number the net was not broken.
Jesus said to them, Come and take some food. And all the disciples were in fear of putting the question, Who are you? being conscious that it was the Lord.
Then Jesus came and took the bread and gave it to them, and the fish in the same way.
Now this was the third time that Jesus let himself be seen by the disciples after he had come back from the dead.
Then when they had taken food, Jesus said to Simon Peter, Simon, son of John, is your love for me greater than the love of these others? He said to him, Yes, Lord; you are certain of my love for you. He said to him, Then give my lambs food.
Again, a second time, he said to him, Simon, son of John, have you any love for me? Yes, Lord, he said, you are certain of my love for you. Then take care of my sheep, said Jesus.
He said to him a third time, Simon, son of John, am I dear to you? Now Peter was troubled in his heart because he put the question a third time, Am I dear to you? And he said to him, Lord, you have knowledge of all things; you see that you are dear to me. Jesus said to him, Then give my sheep food.
Truly I say to you, When you were young, you made yourself ready and went wherever you had a desire to go: but when you are old, you will put out your hands and another will make you ready, and you will be taken where you have no desire to go.
Now this he said, pointing out the sort of death by which he would give God glory. And after saying this, he said to him, Come after me.
Then Peter, turning round, saw the disciple who was dear to Jesus coming after them--the disciple who was resting on his breast at the last meal, and said, Lord, who is it who will be false to you?
Seeing him, Peter said to Jesus, What about this man?
Jesus said to him, If it is my desire for him to be here till I come back, what is that to you? come yourself after me.
So this saying went about among the brothers that this disciple would not undergo death: Jesus, however, did not say that he would not undergo death, but, If it is my desire for him to be here till I come back, what is that to you?
This is the disciple who gives witness about these things and who put them in writing: and we have knowledge that his witness is true.
And Jesus did such a number of other things that, if every one was recorded, it is my opinion that even the world itself is not great enough for the books there would be.
Now there was among the Pharisees a man named Nicodemus, who was one of the rulers of the Jews.
He came to Jesus by night and said to him, Rabbi, we are certain that you have come from God as a teacher, because no man would be able to do these signs which you do if God was not with him.
Jesus said to him, Truly, I say to you, Without a new birth no man is able to see the kingdom of God.
Nicodemus said to him, How is it possible for a man to be given birth when he is old? Is he able to go into his mother's body a second time and come to birth again?
Jesus said in answer, Truly, I say to you, If a man's birth is not from water and from the Spirit, it is not possible for him to go into the kingdom of God.
That which has birth from the flesh is flesh, and that which has birth from the Spirit is spirit.
Do not be surprised that I say to you, It is necessary for you to have a second birth.
The wind goes where its pleasure takes it, and the sound of it comes to your ears, but you are unable to say where it comes from and where it goes: so it is with everyone whose birth is from the Spirit.
And Nicodemus said to him, How is it possible for these things to be?
And Jesus, answering, said, Are you the teacher of Israel and have no knowledge of these things?
Truly, I say to you, We say that of which we have knowledge; we give witness of what we have seen; and you do not take our witness to be true.
If you have no belief when my words are about the things of earth, how will you have belief if my words are about the things of heaven?
And no one has ever gone up to heaven but he who came down from heaven, the Son of man.
As the snake was lifted up by Moses in the waste land, even so it is necessary for the Son of man to be lifted up:
So that whoever has faith may have in him eternal life.
For God had such love for the world that he gave his only Son, so that whoever has faith in him may not come to destruction but have eternal life.
God did not send his Son into the world to be judge of the world; he sent him so that the world might have salvation through him.
The man who has faith in him does not come up to be judged; but he who has no faith in him has been judged even now, because he has no faith in the name of the only Son of God.
And this is the test by which men are judged: the light has come into the world and men have more love for the dark than for the light, because their acts are evil.
The light is hated by everyone whose acts are evil and he does not come to the light for fear that his acts will be seen.
But he whose life is true comes to the light, so that it may be clearly seen that his acts have been done by the help of God.
After these things Jesus and his disciples went into the land of Judaea, and there he was with them for some time, giving baptism.
Now John was then giving baptism at Aenon near Salim, because there was much water there; and people came and were given baptism.
For at this time John had not been put into prison.
Then a question came up between John's disciples and a Jew about washing.
And they went to John and said to him, Rabbi, the man who was with you on the other side of the Jordan, the man to whom you gave witness, is now giving baptism, and everyone is going to him.
And this was John's answer: A man is unable to have anything if it is not given to him from heaven.
You yourselves give witness that I said, I am not the Christ. What I said was, I am sent before the Christ.
He who has the bride is the husband: but the husband's friend, whose place is by his side and whose ears are open to him, is full of joy because of the husband's voice: such is my joy, and it is complete.
He has to become greater while I become less.
He who comes from heaven is greater than all others: he who comes from earth is of the earth, and of the earth are his words: he who comes from heaven is over all.
He gives witness of what he has seen and of what has come to his ears; and no man takes his witness as true.
He who so takes his witness has made clear his faith that God is true.
For he whom God has sent says God's words; and God does not give him the Spirit by measure.
The Father has love for the Son and has put all things into his hands.
He who has faith in the Son has eternal life; but he who has not faith in the Son will not see life; God's wrath is resting on him.
Now when it was clear to the Lord that word had come to the ears of the Pharisees that Jesus was making more disciples than John and was giving them baptism
(Though, in fact, it was his disciples who gave baptism, not Jesus himself),
He went out of Judaea into Galilee again.
And it was necessary for him to go through Samaria.
So he came to a town of Samaria which was named Sychar, near to the bit of land which Jacob gave to his son Joseph:
Now Jacob's fountain was there. Jesus, being tired after his journey, was resting by the fountain. It was about the sixth hour.
A woman of Samaria came to get water, and Jesus said to her, Give me some water.
For his disciples had gone to the town to get food.
The woman of Samaria said to him, Why do you, a Jew, make a request for water to me, a woman of Samaria? She said this because Jews have nothing to do with the people of Samaria.
In answer Jesus said, If you had knowledge of what God gives freely and who it is who says to you, Give me water, you would make your prayer to him, and he would give you living water.
The woman said to him, Sir, you have no vessel and the fountain is deep; from where will you get the living water?
Are you greater than our father Jacob who gave us the fountain and took the water of it himself, with his children and his cattle?
Jesus said to her, Everyone who takes this water will be in need of it again:
But whoever takes the water I give him will never be in need of drink again; for the water I give him will become in him a fountain of eternal life.
The woman said to him, Sir, give me this water, so that I may not be in need again of drink and will not have to come all this way for it.
Jesus said to her, Go, get your husband and come back here with him.
In answer, the woman said, I have no husband. Jesus said to her, You have said rightly, I have no husband:
You have had five husbands, and the man you have now is not your husband: that was truly said.
The woman said to him, Sir, I see that you are a prophet.
Our fathers gave worship on this mountain, but you Jews say that the right place for worship is in Jerusalem.
Jesus said to her, Woman, take my word for this; the time is coming when you will not give worship to the Father on this mountain or in Jerusalem.
You give worship, but without knowledge of what you are worshipping: we give worship to what we have knowledge of: for salvation comes from the Jews.
But the time is coming, and is even now here, when the true worshippers will give worship to the Father in the true way of the spirit, for these are the worshippers desired by the Father.
God is Spirit: then let his worshippers give him worship in the true way of the spirit.
The woman said to him, I am certain that the Messiah, who is named Christ, is coming; when he comes he will make all things clear to us.
Jesus said to her, I, who am talking to you, am he.
At that point the disciples came back, and they were surprised to see him talking to a woman; but not one of them said to him, What is your purpose? or, Why are you talking to her?
Then the woman put down her water-pot and went into the town, and said to the people,
Come and see a man who has been talking to me of everything I ever did! Is it possible that this is the Christ?
So they went out of the town and came to him.
While this was taking place, the disciples were saying to Jesus, Master, take some food.
But he said to them, I have food of which you have no knowledge.
So the disciples said one to another, Did anyone give him food?
Jesus said, My food is to do the pleasure of him who sent me and to make his work complete.
You would say, Four months from now is the time of the grain-cutting. Take a look, I say to you, at the fields; they are even now white for cutting.
He who does the cutting now has his reward; he is getting together fruit for eternal life, so that he who did the planting and he who gets in the grain may have joy together.
In this the saying is a true one, One does the planting, and another gets in the grain.
I sent you to get in grain which you had no hand in planting: other men did that work, and you take the reward.
Now a number of the people of that town had faith in him because of the woman's witness: He has been talking to me of everything I ever did.
So when the people came to him they made request to him to be among them for a time, and he was there two days.
And a great number more of them came to have faith in him because of what he himself said.
And they said to the woman, Now we have faith, but not because of your story: we ourselves have given ear to his words, and we are certain that he is truly the Saviour of the world.
And after the two days he went on from there into Galilee.
For Jesus himself said that a prophet has no honour in the country of his birth.
So when he came into Galilee, the Galilaeans took him to their hearts because of the things which they had seen him do in Jerusalem at the feast--they themselves having been there at the feast.
So he came to Cana in Galilee, where he had made the water wine. And there was a certain man of high position whose son was ill at Capernaum.
When it came to his ears that Jesus had come from Judaea into Galilee, he went to him and made a request that he would come down to his son, who was near to death, and make him well.
Then Jesus said to him, You will not have faith if you do not see signs and wonders.
The man said, Sir, come down before my boy is dead.
And Jesus said, Go in peace; your son is living. The man had faith in the word which Jesus said to him and went away.
And while he was going down, his servants came to him and said, Your boy is living.
So he put a question to them as to the hour when he became better; and they said to him, The disease went from him yesterday at the seventh hour.
It was clear then to the father that this was the very time at which Jesus said to him, Your son is living. And he had faith in Jesus, he and all his family.
Now this is the second sign which Jesus did after he had come out of Judaea into Galilee.
After these things there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
Now in Jerusalem near the sheep-market there is a public bath which in Hebrew is named Beth-zatha. It has five doorways.
In these doorways there were a great number of people with different diseases: some unable to see, some without the power of walking, some with wasted bodies.
[]
One man was there who had been ill for thirty-eight years.
When Jesus saw him there on the floor it was clear to him that he had been now a long time in that condition, and so he said to the man, Is it your desire to get well?
The ill man said in answer, Sir, I have nobody to put me into the bath when the water is moving; and while I am on the way down some other person gets in before me.
Jesus said to him, Get up, take your bed and go.
And the man became well straight away, and took up his bed and went. Now that day was the Sabbath.
So the Jews said to the man who had been made well, It is the Sabbath; and it is against the law for you to take up your bed.
He said to them, But he who made me well, said to me, Take up your bed and go.
Then they put to him the question: Who is the man who said to you, Take it up and go?
Now he who had been made well had no knowledge who it was, Jesus having gone away because of the number of people who were in that place.
After a time Jesus came across him in the Temple and said to him, See, you are well and strong; do no more sin for fear a worse thing comes to you.
The man went away and said to the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well.
And for this reason the Jews were turned against Jesus, because he was doing these things on the Sabbath.
But his answer was: My Father is still working even now, and so I am working.
For this cause the Jews had an even greater desire to put Jesus to death, because not only did he not keep the Sabbath but he said God was his Father, so making himself equal with God.
So Jesus made answer and said, Truly I say to you, The Son is not able to do anything himself; he is able to do only what he sees the Father doing; whatever the Father does the Son does it in the same way.
For the Father has love for the Son and lets him see everything which he does: and he will let him see greater works than these so that you may be full of wonder.
In the same way, as the Father gives life to the dead, even so the Son gives life to those to whom he is pleased to give it.
The Father is not the judge of men, but he has given all decisions into the hands of the Son;
So that all men may give honour to the Son even as they give honour to the Father. He who gives no honour to the Son gives no honour to the Father who sent him.
Truly I say to you, The man whose ears are open to my word and who has faith in him who sent me, has eternal life; he will not be judged, but has come from death into life.
Truly I say to you, The time is coming, it has even now come, when the voice of the Son of God will come to the ears of the dead, and those hearing it will have life.
For even as the Father has life in himself, so he has given to the Son to have life in himself.
And he has given him authority to be judge because he is the Son of man.
Do not be surprised at this: for the time is coming when his voice will come to all who are in the place of the dead,
And they will come out; those who have done good, into the new life; and those who have done evil, to be judged.
Of myself I am unable to do anything: as the voice comes to me so I give a decision: and my decision is right because I have no desire to do what is pleasing to myself, but only what is pleasing to him who sent me.
If I gave witness about myself, my witness would not be true.
There is another who gives witness about me and I am certain that the witness he gives about me is true.
You sent to John and he gave true witness.
But I have no need of a man's witness: I only say these things so that you may have salvation.
He was a burning and shining light, and for a time you were ready to be happy in his light.
But the witness which I have is greater than that of John: the work which the Father has given me to do, the very work which I am now doing, is a witness that the Father has sent me.
And the Father himself who sent me has given witness about me. Not one of you has ever given ear to his voice; his form you have not seen.
And you have not kept his word in your hearts, because you have not faith in him whom he has sent.
You make search in the holy Writings, in the belief that through them you get eternal life; and it is those Writings which give witness about me.
And still you have no desire to come to me so that you may have life.
I do not take honour from men;
But I have knowledge of you that you have no love for God in your hearts.
I have come in my Father's name, and your hearts are not open to me. If another comes with no other authority but himself, you will give him your approval.
How is it possible for you to have faith while you take honour one from another and have no desire for the honour which comes from the only God?
Put out of your minds the thought that I will say things against you to the Father: the one who says things against you is Moses, on whom you put your hopes.
If you had belief in Moses you would have belief in me; for his writings are about me.
If you have no belief in his writings, how will you have belief in my words?
After these things Jesus went away to the other side of the sea of Galilee--that is, the sea of Tiberias.
And a great number of people went after him because they saw the signs which he did on those who were ill.
Then Jesus went up the mountain and was seated there with his disciples.
Now the Passover, a feast of the Jews, was near.
Lifting up his eyes, Jesus saw a great number of people coming to where he was, and he said to Philip, Where may we get bread for all these people?
This he said, testing him: for he had no doubt what he himself would do.
Philip made answer, Bread to the value of two hundred pence would not be enough even to give everyone a little.
One of his disciples, Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, said to Jesus,
There is a boy here with five barley cakes and two fishes: but what is that among such a number?
Jesus said, Let the people be seated. Now there was much grass in that place. And those seated on the grass were about five thousand.
Then Jesus took the cakes and having given praise to God, he gave them to the people who were seated, and the fishes in the same way, as much as they had need of.
And when they had had enough, Jesus said to his disciples, Take up the broken bits which are over, so that nothing may be wasted.
So they took them up: twelve baskets full of broken bits of the five cakes which were over after the people had had enough.
And when the people saw the sign which he had done, they said, Truly, this is the prophet who is to come into the world.
Now when Jesus saw that the people were about to come and take him by force to make him a king, he went away again up the mountain by himself.
When evening came the disciples went down to the sea;
And they took a boat and went across the sea in the direction of Capernaum. By then it was dark and still Jesus had not come to them.
The sea was getting rough because of a strong wind which was blowing.
After they had gone three or four miles they saw Jesus walking on the sea and coming near to the boat; and they had great fear.
But he said to them, It is I, have no fear.
Then they readily took him into the boat: and straight away the boat was at the land to which they were going.
The day after, the people who were on the other side of the sea saw that only one small boat had been there, that Jesus had not gone in that boat with the disciples, but that the disciples had gone away by themselves.
Some other boats, however, came from Tiberias near to the place where they had taken the bread after the Lord had given praise.
So when the people saw that Jesus was not there, or his disciples, they got into those boats and went over to Capernaum looking for Jesus.
And when they came across him on the other side of the sea they said, Rabbi, when did you come here?
Jesus, answering them, said, Truly I say to you, You come after me, not because you saw signs, but because you were given the bread and had enough.
Let your work not be for the food which comes to an end, but for the food which goes on for eternal life, which the Son of man will give to you, for on him has God the Father put his mark.
Then they said to him, How may we do the works of God?
Jesus, answering, said to them, This is to do the work of God: to have faith in him whom God has sent.
So they said, What sign do you give us, so that we may see and have faith in you? What do you do?
Our fathers had the manna in the waste land, as the Writings say, He gave them bread from heaven.
Jesus then said to them, Truly I say to you, What Moses gave you was not the bread from heaven; it is my Father who gives you the true bread from heaven.
The bread of God is the bread which comes down out of heaven and gives life to the world.
Ah, Lord, they said, give us that bread for ever!
And this was the answer of Jesus: I am the bread of life. He who comes to me will never be in need of food, and he who has faith in me will never be in need of drink.
But it is as I said to you: you have seen me, and still you have no faith.
Whatever the Father gives to me will come to me; and I will not send away anyone who comes to me.
For I have come down from heaven, not to do my pleasure, but the pleasure of him who sent me.
And this is the pleasure of him who sent me, that I am not to let out of my hands anything which he has given me, but I am to give it new life on the last day.
This, I say, is my Father's pleasure, that everyone who sees the Son and has faith in him may have eternal life: and I will take him up on the last day.
Now the Jews said bitter things about Jesus because of his words, I am the bread which came down from heaven.
And they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we have seen? How is it then that he now says, I have come down from heaven?
Jesus made answer and said, Do not say things against me, one to another.
No man is able to come to me if the Father who sent me does not give him the desire to come: and I will take him up from the dead on the last day.
The writings of the prophets say, And they will all have teaching from God. Everyone whose ears have been open to the teaching of the Father comes to me.
Not that anyone has ever seen the Father; only he who is from God, he has seen the Father.
Truly I say to you, He who has faith in me has eternal life.
I am the bread of life.
Your fathers took the manna in the waste land--and they are dead.
The bread which comes from heaven is such bread that a man may take it for food and never see death.
I am the living bread which has come from heaven: if any man takes this bread for food he will have life for ever: and more than this, the bread which I will give is my flesh which I will give for the life of the world.
Then the Jews had an angry discussion among themselves, saying, How is it possible for this man to give us his flesh for food?
Then Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you, If you do not take the flesh of the Son of man for food, and if you do not take his blood for drink, you have no life in you.
He who takes my flesh for food and my blood for drink has eternal life: and I will take him up from the dead at the last day.
My flesh is true food and my blood is true drink.
He who takes my flesh for food and my blood for drink is in me and I in him.
As the living Father has sent me, and I have life because of the Father, even so he who takes me for his food will have life because of me.
This is the bread which has come down from heaven. It is not like the food which your fathers had: they took of the manna, and are dead; but he who takes this bread for food will have life for ever.
Jesus said these things in the Synagogue while he was teaching at Capernaum.
Then, hearing this, a number of his disciples said, This is a hard saying; who is able to take in such teaching?
When Jesus became conscious that his disciples were protesting about what he said, he said to them, Does this give you trouble?
What then will you say if you see the Son of man going up to where he was before?
The spirit is the life giver; the flesh is of no value: the words which I have said to you are spirit and they are life.
But still some of you have no faith. For it was clear to Jesus from the first who they were who had no faith, and who it was who would be false to him.
And he said, This is why I said to you, No man is able to come to me if he is not given the power to do so by the Father.
Because of what he said, a number of the disciples went back and would no longer go with him.
So Jesus said to the twelve, Have you a desire to go away?
Then Simon Peter gave this answer: Lord, to whom are we to go? you have the words of eternal life;
And we have faith and are certain that you are the Holy One of God.
Then Jesus said, Did I not make a selection of you, the twelve, and one of you is a son of the Evil One?
He was talking of Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot. It was he who was to be false to Jesus--one of the twelve.
After this, Jesus went from place to place in Galilee. He did not go about in Judaea, because the Jews were looking for a chance to put him to death.
But the feast of the Jews, the feast of tents, was near.
So his brothers said to him, Go away from here into Judaea so that your disciples may see the works which you do.
Because no man does things secretly if he has a desire that men may have knowledge of him. If you do these things, let yourself be seen by all men.
For even his brothers had no belief in him.
Jesus said to them, My time is still to come, but any time is good for you.
It is not possible for you to be hated by the world; but I am hated by it, because I give witness that what it does is evil.
Go you up to the feast: I am not going up now to the feast because my time has not fully come.
Having said these things to them, he still kept in Galilee.
But after his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he went up, not publicly, but in secret.
At the feast the Jews were looking for him and saying, Where is he?
And there was much discussion about him among the mass of the people. Some said, He is a good man; but others said, No, he is giving people false ideas.
But no man said anything about him openly for fear of the Jews.
Now in the middle of the feast Jesus went up to the Temple and was teaching.
Then the Jews were surprised and said, How has this man got knowledge of books? He has never been to school.
Jesus gave them this answer: It is not my teaching, but his who sent me.
If any man is ready to do God's pleasure he will have knowledge of the teaching and of where it comes from--from God or from myself.
The man whose words come from himself is looking for glory for himself, but he who is looking for the glory of him who sent him--that man is true and there is no evil in him.
Did not Moses give you the law? Even so, not one of you keeps the law. Why have you a desire to put me to death?
The people said in answer, You have an evil spirit: who has any desire to put you to death?
This was the answer of Jesus: I have done one work and you are all surprised at it.
Moses gave you circumcision--not that it comes from Moses, but from the fathers--and even on the Sabbath you give a child circumcision.
If a child is given circumcision on the Sabbath so that the law of Moses may not be broken, why are you angry with me because I made a man completely well on the Sabbath?
Let not your decisions be based on what you see, but on righteousness.
Then some of the people of Jerusalem said, Is not this the man whose death is desired?
And here he is talking openly and they say nothing to him! Is it possible that the rulers have knowledge that this is truly the Christ?
However, it is clear to us where this man comes from: but when the Christ comes no one will have knowledge where he comes from.
Then, when he was teaching in the Temple, Jesus said with a loud voice, You have knowledge of me and you have knowledge of where I come from; and I have not come of myself; but there is One who has sent me; he is true, but you have no knowledge of him.
I have knowledge of him because I came from him and he sent me.
Then they had a desire to take him: but no man put hands on him because his hour was still to come.
And numbers of the people had belief in him, and they said, When the Christ comes will he do more signs than this man has done?
This discussion of the people came to the ears of the Pharisees; and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent servants to take him.
Then Jesus said, I will be with you a little longer and then I go to him who sent me.
You will be looking for me, and you will not see me: and where I am you may not come.
So the Jews said among themselves, To what place is he going where we will not see him? will he go to the Jews living among the Greeks and become the teacher of the Greeks?
What is this saying of his, You will be looking for me and will not see me, and where I am you may not come?
On the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus got up and said in a loud voice, If any man is in need of drink let him come to me and I will give it to him.
He who has faith in me, out of his body, as the Writings have said, will come rivers of living water.
This he said of the Spirit which would be given to those who had faith in him: the Spirit had not been given then, because the glory of Jesus was still to come.
When these words came to their ears, some of the people said, This is certainly the prophet.
Others said, This is the Christ. But others said, Not so; will the Christ come from Galilee?
Do not the Writings say that the Christ comes of the seed of David and from Beth-lehem, the little town where David was?
So there was a division among the people because of him.
And some of them had a desire to take him; but no man put hands on him.
Then the servants went back to the chief priests and Pharisees, who said to them, Why have you not got him with you?
The servants made answer, No man ever said things like this man.
Then the Pharisees said to them, Have you, like the others, been given false ideas?
Have any of the rulers belief in him, or any one of the Pharisees?
But these people who have no knowledge of the law are cursed.
Nicodemus--he who had come to Jesus before, being himself one of them--said to them,
Is a man judged by our law before it has given him a hearing and has knowledge of what he has done?
This was their answer: And do you come from Galilee? Make search and you will see that no prophet comes out of Galilee.
[And every man went to his house;
But Jesus went to the Mountain of Olives.
And early in the morning he came again into the Temple and all the people came to him and he was seated teaching them.
Now the scribes and Pharisees came, with a woman who had been taken in the act of sinning against the married relation;
And putting her forward, they said to him, Master, this woman has been taken in the very act of sinning against the married relation.
Now in the law Moses gave directions that such women were to be stoned; what do you say about it?
They said this, testing him, so that they might have something against him. But Jesus, with his head bent down, made letters on the floor with his finger.
But when they went on with their questions, he got up and said to them, Let him among you who is without sin be the first to send a stone at her.
And again, with bent head, he made letters on the floor.
And when his words came to their ears, they went out one by one, starting with the oldest even to the last, because they were conscious of what was in their hearts: and Jesus was there by himself with the woman before him.
Then Jesus got up, and seeing nobody but the woman, he said to her, Where are the men who said things against you? did no one give a decision against you?
And she said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said, And I do not give a decision against you: go, and never do wrong again.]
Then again Jesus said to them, I am the light of the world; he who comes with me will not be walking in the dark but will have the light of life.
So the Pharisees said to him, The witness you give is about yourself: your witness is not true.
Jesus said in answer, Even if I give witness about myself, my witness is true, because I have knowledge of where I came from and where I am going; but you have no knowledge of where I come from or of where I am going.
You are judging from what you see; I am judging no man.
Even if I am judging, my decision is right, because I am not by myself--with me is the Father who sent me.
Even in your law it is said that the witness of two men is true.
I give witness about myself and the Father who sent me gives witness about me.
Then they said to him, Where is your Father? Jesus said in answer, You have no knowledge of me or of my Father: if you had knowledge of me you would have knowledge of my Father.
Jesus said these words in the place where the offerings were stored, while he was teaching in the Temple: but no man took him because his time was still to come.
Then he said to them again, I am going away and you will be looking for me, but death will overtake you in your sins. It is not possible for you to come where I am going.
So the Jews said, Will he take his life? Is that why he says, Where I go it is not possible for you to come?
And he said to them, You are of the earth; I am from heaven: you are of this world; I am not of this world.
For this reason I said to you that death will overtake you in your sins: for if you have not faith that I am he, death will come to you while you are in your sins.
Then they said to him, Who are you? Jesus said, What I said to you from the first.
I have much to say about you and against you: but he who sent me is true and what he has said to me I say to the world.
They did not see that his words were about the Father.
So Jesus said, When the Son of man has been lifted up by you, then it will be clear to you who I am, and that I do nothing of myself, but say as the Father gave me teaching.
He who sent me is with me; he has not gone from me, because at all times I do the things which are pleasing to him.
When he said this a number came to have faith in him.
Then Jesus said to the Jews who had faith in him, If you keep my word, then you are truly my disciples;
And you will have knowledge of what is true, and that will make you free.
They said to him in answer, We are Abraham's seed and have never been any man's servant: why do you say, You will become free?
And this was the answer Jesus gave them: Truly I say to you, Everyone who does evil is the servant of sin.
Now the servant does not go on living in the house for ever, but the son does.
If then the son makes you free, you will be truly free.
I am conscious that you are Abraham's seed; but you have a desire to put me to death because my word has no place in you.
I say the things which I have seen in my Father's house: and you do the things which come to you from your father's house.
In answer they said to him, Our father is Abraham. Jesus said to them, If you were Abraham's children you would do what Abraham did.
But now you have a desire to put me to death, a man who has said to you what is true, as I had it from God: Abraham did not do that.
You are doing the works of your father. They said to him, We are true sons of Abraham; we have one Father, who is God.
Jesus said to them, If God was your Father you would have love for me, because it was from God I came and am here. I did not come of myself, but he sent me.
Why are my words not clear to you? It is because your ears are shut to my teaching.
You are the children of your father the Evil One and it is your pleasure to do his desires. From the first he was a taker of life; and he did not go in the true way because there is no true thing in him. When he says what is false, it is natural to him, for he is false and the father of what is false.
But because I say what is true, you have no belief in me.
Which of you is able truly to say that I am a sinner? If I say what is true, why have you no belief in me?
He who is a child of God gives ear to the words of God: your ears are not open to them because you are not from God.
The Jews said to him in answer, Are we not right in saying that you are of Samaria and have an evil spirit?
And this was the answer of Jesus: I have not an evil spirit; but I give honour to my Father and you do not give honour to me.
I, however, am not in search of glory for myself: there is One who is searching for it and he is judge.
Truly I say to you, If a man keeps my word he will never see death.
The Jews said to him, Now we are certain that you have an evil spirit. Abraham is dead, and the prophets are dead; and you say, If a man keeps my word he will never see death.
Are you greater than our father Abraham, who is dead? and the prophets are dead: who do you say that you are?
Jesus said in answer, If I take glory for myself, my glory is nothing: it is my Father who gives me glory, of whom you say that he is your God.
You have no knowledge of him, but I have knowledge of him; and if I said I have no knowledge of him I would be talking falsely like you: but I have full knowledge of him, and I keep his word.
Your father Abraham was full of joy at the hope of seeing my day: he saw it and was glad.
Then the Jews said to him, You are not fifty years old; have you seen Abraham?
Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you, Before Abraham came into being, I am.
So they took up stones to send at him: but Jesus got secretly out of their way and went out of the Temple.
And when he went on his way, he saw a man blind from birth.
And his disciples put a question to him, saying, Master, was it because of this man's sin, or the sin of his father and mother, that he has been blind from birth?
Jesus said in answer, It was not because of his sin, or because of his father's or mother's; it was so that the works of God might be seen openly in him.
While it is day we have to do the works of him who sent me: the night comes when no work may be done.
As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.
Having said these words, he put earth, mixed with water from his mouth, on the man's eyes,
And said to him, Go and make yourself clean in the bath of Siloam (the sense of the name is, Sent). So he went away and, after washing, came back able to see.
Then the neighbours and others who had seen him before in the street, with his hand out for money, said, Is not this the man who got money from people?
Some said, It is he: others said, No, but he is like him. He said, I am he.
So they said to him, How then were your eyes made open?
His answer was: The man who is named Jesus put earth mixed with water on my eyes, and said to me, Go and make yourself clean in Siloam: so I went away and, after washing, am now able to see.
And they said to him, Where is he? His answer was: I have no knowledge.
They took him before the Pharisees--this man who had been blind.
Now the day on which the earth was mixed by Jesus and the man's eyes were made open was the Sabbath.
So the Pharisees put more questions to him about how his eyes had been made open. And he said to them, He put earth on my eyes, and I had a wash and am able to see.
Then some of the Pharisees said, That man has not come from God, for he does not keep the Sabbath. Others said, How is it possible for a sinner to do such signs? So there was a division among them.
Again they said to the blind man, What have you to say about him for opening your eyes? And he said, He is a prophet.
Now the Jews had no belief in the statement that he had been blind and was now able to see, till they sent for the father and mother of the man whose eyes had been made open,
And put the question to them, saying, Is this your son, of whom you say that he was blind at birth? how is it then that he is now able to see?
In answer his father and mother said, We are certain that this is our son and that he was blind at birth:
But how it is he is now able to see, or who made his eyes open, we are not able to say: put the question to him; he is old enough to give an answer for himself.
They said this because of their fear of the Jews: for the Jews had come to an agreement that if any man said that Jesus was the Christ he would be put out of the Synagogue.
That was the reason why they said, He is old enough; put the question to him.
So they sent a second time for the man who had been blind and they said to him, Give glory to God: it is clear to us that this man is a sinner.
He said in answer, I have no knowledge if he is a sinner or not, but one thing I am certain about; I was blind, and now I see.
Then they said to him, What did he do to you? how did he give you the use of your eyes?
His answer was: I have said it before, but your ears were shut: why would you have me say it again? is it your desire to become his disciples?
And they were angry with him and said, You are his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses.
We are certain that God gave his word to Moses: but as for this man, we have no knowledge where he comes from.
The man said in answer, Why, here is a strange thing! You have no knowledge where he comes from though he gave me the use of my eyes.
We have knowledge that God does not give ear to sinners, but if any man is a worshipper of God and does his pleasure, to him God's ears are open.
In all the years nobody has ever before seen the eyes of a man blind from birth made open.
If this man did not come from God he would be unable to do anything.
Their answer was: You came to birth through sin; do you make yourself our teacher? And they put him out of the Synagogue.
It came to the ears of Jesus that they had put him out, and meeting him he said, Have you faith in the Son of man?
He said in answer, And who is he, Lord? Say, so that I may have faith in him.
Jesus said to him, You have seen him; it is he who is talking to you.
And he said, Lord, I have faith. And he gave him worship.
And Jesus said, I came into this world to be a judge, so that those who do not see may see, and those who see may become blind.
These words came to the ears of the Pharisees who were with him and they said to him, Are we, then, blind?
Jesus said to them, If you were blind you would have no sin: but now that you say, We see; your sin is there still.
