Man is divided into three classes, viz., the hare man, the bull man, and
the horse man, according to the size of his lingam.

Woman also, according to the depth of her yoni, is either a female deer,
a mare, or a female elephant.

There are thus three equal unions between persons of corresponding
dimensions, and there are six unequal unions, when the dimensions do not
correspond, or nine in all, as the following table shows:

In these unequal unions, when the male exceeds the female in point of
size, his union with a woman who is immediately next to him in size is
called high union, and is of two kinds; while his union with the woman
most remote from him in size is called the highest union, and is of one
kind only. On the other hand when the female exceeds the male in point
of size, her union with a man immediately next to her in size is called
low union, and is of two kinds; while her union with a man most remote
from her in size is called the lowest union, and is of one kind only.

In other words, the horse and mare, the bull and deer, form the high
union, while the horse and deer form the highest union. On the female
side, the elephant and bull, the mare and hare, form low unions, while
the elephant and the hare make the lowest unions.

There are then, nine kinds of union according to dimensions. Amongst all
these, equal unions are the best, those of a superlative degree, _i.e._,
the highest and the lowest, are the worst, and the rest are middling,
and with them the high are better than the low.

There are also nine kinds of union according to the force of passion or
carnal desire, as follows:

A man is called a man of small passion whose desire at the time of
sexual union is not great, whose semen is scanty, and who cannot bear
the warm embraces of the female.

Those who differ from this temperament are called men of middling
passion, while those of intense passion are full of desire.

In the same way, women are supposed to have the three degrees of feeling
as specified above.

Lastly, according to time there are three kinds of men and women, viz.,
the short-timed, the moderate-timed, and the long-timed, and of these as
in the previous statements, there are nine kinds of union.

But on this last head there is a difference of opinion about the female,
which should be stated.

Auddalika says, Females do not emit as males do. The males simply
remove their desire, while the females, from their consciousness of
desire, feel a certain kind of pleasure, which gives them satisfaction,
but it is impossible for them to tell you what kind of pleasure they
feel. The fact from which this becomes evident is, that males, when
engaged in coition, cease of themselves after emission, and are
satisfied, but it is not so with females.

This opinion is, however, objected to on the grounds that if a male be a
long-timed, the female loves him the more, but if he be short-timed, she
is dissatisfied with him. And this circumstance, some say, would prove
that the female emits also.

But this opinion does not hold good, for if it takes a long time to
allay a woman's desire, and during this time she is enjoying great
pleasure, it is quite natural then that she should wish for its
continuation. And on this subject there is a verse as follows:

By union with men the lust, desire, or passion of women is satisfied,
and the pleasure derived from the consciousness of it is called their
satisfaction.

The followers of Babhravya, however, say that the semen of women
continues to fall from the beginning of the sexual union to its end, and
it is right that it should be so, for if they had no semen there would
be no embryo.

To this there is an objection. In the beginning of coition the passion
of the woman is middling, and she cannot bear the vigorous thrusts of
her lover, but by degrees her passion increases until she ceases to
think about her body, and then finally she wishes to stop from further
coition.

This objection, however, does not hold good, for even in ordinary things
that revolve with great force, such as a potter's wheel, or a top, we
find that the motion at first is slow, but by degrees it becomes very
rapid. In the same way the passion of the woman having gradually
increased, she has a desire to discontinue coition, when all the semen
has fallen away. And there is a verse with regard to this as follows:

The fall of the semen of the man takes place only at the end of
coition, while the semen of the woman falls continually, and after the
semen of both has all fallen away then they wish for the discontinuance
of coition.

Lastly, Vatsyayana is of opinion that the semen of the female falls in
the same way as that of the male.

Now some may ask here: If men and women are beings of the same kind, and
are engaged in bringing about the same result, why should they have
different works to do.

Vatsya says that this is so, because the ways of working as well as the
consciousness of pleasure in men and women are different. The difference
in the ways of working, by which men are the actors, and women are the
persons acted upon, is owing to the nature of the male and the female,
otherwise the actor would be sometimes the person acted upon, and vice
versâ. And from this difference in the ways of working follows the
difference in the consciousness of pleasure, for a man thinks, this
woman is united with me, and a woman thinks, I am united with this
man.

It may be said that if the ways of working in men and women are
different, why should not there be a difference, even in the pleasure
they feel, and which is the result of those ways.

But this objection is groundless, for the person acting and the person
acted upon being of different kinds, there is a reason for the
difference in their ways of working; but there is no reason for any
difference in the pleasure they feel, because they both naturally derive
pleasure from the act they perform.

On this again some may say that when different persons are engaged in
doing the same work, we find that they accomplish the same end or
purpose: while, on the contrary, in the case of men and women we find
that each of them accomplishes his or her own end separately, and this
is inconsistent. But this is a mistake, for we find that sometimes two
things are done at the same time, as for instance in the fighting of
rams, both the rams receive the shock at the same time on their heads.
Again, in throwing one wood apple against another, and also in a fight
or struggle of wrestlers. If it be said that in these cases the things
employed are of the same kind, it is answered that even in the case of
men and women, the nature of the two persons is the same. And as the
difference in their ways of working arises from the difference of their
conformation only, it follows that men experience the same kind of
pleasure as women do.

There is also a verse on this subject as follows: Men and women being
of the same nature, feel the same kind of pleasure, and therefore a man
should marry such a woman as will love him ever afterwards.

The pleasure of men and women being thus proved to be of the same kind,
it follows that in regard to time, there are nine kinds of sexual
intercourse, in the same way as there are nine kinds, according to the
force of passion.

There being thus nine kinds of union with regard to dimensions, force of
passion, and time, respectively, by making combinations of them,
innumerable kinds of union would be produced. Therefore in each
particular kind of sexual union, men should use such means as they may
think suitable for the occasion.

At the first time of sexual union the passion of the male is intense,
and his time is short, but in subsequent unions on the same day the
reverse of this is the case. With the female, however, it is the
contrary, for at the first time her passion is weak, and then her time
long, but on subsequent occasions on the same day, her passion is
intense and her time short, until her passion is satisfied.

This part of the Kama Shastra, which treats of sexual union, is also
called Sixty-four (Chatushshashti). Some old authors say that it is
called so, because it contains sixty-four chapters. Others are of
opinion that the author of this part being a person named Panchala, and
the person who recited the part of the Rig Veda called Dashatapa, which
contains sixty-four verses, being also called Panchala, the name
sixty-four has been given to the part of the work in honour of the Rig
Vedas. The followers of Babhravya say on the other hand that this part
contains eight subjects, viz., the embrace, kissing, scratching with the
nails or fingers, biting, lying down, making various sounds, playing the
part of a man, and the Auparishtaka, or mouth congress. Each of these
subjects being of eight kinds, and eight multiplied by eight being
sixty-four, this part is therefore named sixty-four. But Vatsyayana
affirms that as this part contains also the following subjects, viz.,
striking, crying, the acts of a man during congress, the various kinds
of congress, and other subjects, the name sixty-four is given to it
only accidentally. As, for instance, we say this tree is Saptaparna,
or seven-leaved, this offering of rice is Panchavarna, or
five-coloured, but the tree has not seven leaves, neither has the rice
five colours.

However the part sixty-four is now treated of, and the embrace, being
the first subject, will now be considered.

Now the embrace which indicates the mutual love of a man and woman who
have come together is of four kinds, viz.:

   Touching.
   Piercing.
   Rubbing.
   Pressing.

The action in each case is denoted by the meaning of the word which
stands for it.

When a man under some pretext or other goes in front or alongside
of a woman and touches her body with his own, it is called the touching
embrace.

When a woman in a lonely place bends down, as if to pick up
something, and pierces, as it were, a man sitting or standing, with her
breasts, and the man in return takes hold of them, it is called a
piercing embrace.

The above two kinds of embrace takes place only between persons who do
not, as yet, speak freely with each other.

When two lovers are walking slowly together, either in the dark, or
in a place of public resort, or in a lonely place, and rub their bodies
against each other, it is called a rubbing embrace.

When on the above occasion one of them presses the other's body
forcibly against a wall or pillar, it is called a pressing embrace.

These two last embraces are peculiar to those who know the intentions of
each other.

At the time of the meeting the four following kinds of embrace are used,
viz.:

When a woman, clinging to a man as a creeper twines round a tree,
bends his head down to hers with the desire of kissing him and slightly
makes the sound of sut sut, embraces him, and looks lovingly towards
him, it is called an embrace like the twining of a creeper.

When a woman, having placed one of her feet on the foot of her
lover, and the other on one of his thighs, passes one of her arms round
his back, and the other on his shoulders, makes slightly the sounds of
singing and cooing, and wishes, as it were, to climb up him in order to
have a kiss, it is called an embrace like the climbing of a tree.

These two kinds of embrace take place when the lover is standing.

When lovers lie on a bed, and embrace each other so closely that
the arms and thighs of the one are encircled by the arms and thighs of
the other, and are, as it were, rubbing up against them, this is called
an embrace like the mixture of sesamum seed with rice.

When a man and a woman are very much in love with each other, and
not thinking of any pain or hurt, embrace each other as if they were
entering into each other's bodies, either while the woman is sitting on
the lap of the man or in front of him, or on a bed, then it is called an
embrace like a mixture of milk and water.

These two kinds of embrace take place at the time of sexual union.

Babhravya has thus related to us the above eight kinds of embraces.

Suvarnanabha, moreover, gives us four ways of embracing simple members
of the body, which are:

The embrace of the thighs.

The embrace of the jaghana, _i.e._, the part of the body from the navel
downwards to the thighs.

The embrace of the breasts.

The embrace of the forehead.

When one of two lovers presses forcibly one or both of the thighs
of the other between his or her own, it is called the embrace of
thighs.

When a man presses the jaghana or middle part of the woman's body
against his own, and mounts upon her to practise, either scratching with
the nail or finger, or biting, or striking, or kissing, the hair of the
woman being loose and flowing, it is called the embrace of the
jaghana.

When a man places his breast between the breasts of a woman, and
presses her with it, it is called the embrace of the breasts.

When either of the lovers touches the mouth, the eyes and the
forehead of the other with his or her own, it is called the embrace of
the forehead.

Some say that even shampooing is a kind of embrace, because there is a
touching of bodies in it. But Vatsyayana thinks that shampooing is
performed at a different time, and for a different purpose, and it is
also of a different character, it cannot be said to be included in the
embrace.

There are also some verses on the subject as follows: The whole subject
of embracing is of such a nature that men who ask questions about it, or
who hear about it, or who talk about it, acquire thereby a desire for
enjoyment. Even those embraces that are not mentioned in the Kama
Shastra should be practised at the time of sexual enjoyment, if they are
in any way conducive to the increase of love or passion. The rules of
the Shastra apply so long as the passion of man is middling, but when
the wheel of love is once set in motion, there is then no Shastra and no
order.